[page 1]


Historic, archived document

Do not assume content reflects current
scientific knowledge, policies, or practices.


[page 2]

U. S. DEPARTMENT OF
AGRICULTURE c FARMERS' BULLETIN No. 1746 Mt Ulvf 113?
SUBSISTENCE
FARM GARDENS


[page 3]

VEGETABLE GARDENS are an important factor
in any subsistence-farming enterprise on ac-
count of the large amount of food that can be pro-
duced on a small area devoted to vegetables.
Fruits, while not of as great food value as vege-
tables, are essential because they add variety to the
diet. Combined with poultry and dairy products,
and, under certain conditions, the production of the
home supply of meats, the garden and orchard will
furnish a large part of the family living. Further-
more, when a family grows its own fruits and vege-
tables more liberal use of these essential foods will
be made than when the supply must all be bought
in the market.
Under most conditions one-half acre planted to
miscellaneous vegetables, one-half acre in fruits,
and one-fourth acre in potatoes or sweetpotatoes
will supply the average family with the greater part
of this class of food that they will normally con-
sume. Where the entire subsistence homestead op-
eration is limited to an acre at least one-half of the
area should be devoted to the garden and small
fruits, but whenever the plan includes 3 to 5 acres,
1% to 2 acres can be profitably used for the produc-
tion of fruits and vegetables. This, however, will
include a limited number of trees of the standard
tree fruits.
Men who are employed only part time or short
hours will have ample time during the spring and
summer months to plant and tend a garden. Care-
ful records have shown that under favorable con-
ditions the time spent in the garden yields a return
equal to that obtained for a corresponding period
of time devoted to regular employment.
Issued February 1935
Washington, D. C. Revised October 1936
Slightly revised April 1938
ir


[page 4]

SUBSISTENCE FARM GARDENS
ByW.'R. BBATTIE, senior horticulturist, and J. W. ROBERTS and L. L. HABTER,
senior pathologists. Division of Fruit and Vegetable Crops and Diseases,
Bureau of Plant Industry; W. H. WHITE, principal entomologist, Division of
Truck Crop and Garden Insect Investigations, and D. L. VAN DINE, principal
entomologist, Division of Fruit Insect Investigations, Bureau of Entomology
and Plant Quarantine
CONTENTS
Page
Introduction 1
Soils and fertilizers .. 2
Preparing the soil for planting 2
Watering the garden 3
Seeds for the garden . 4
Starting early plants 5
Tools . 7
Disease and insect control 8
Spraying and dusting equipment 9
Standard remedies 9
Cultural practices for vegetable crops 12
Potatoes 12
Peas 16
Onions 17
Lettuce 18
Radishes 20
Cabbage 20
Kale 24
Spinach 25
Carrots . 26
Beets 26
Swiss chard 27
Parsnips 28
Salsify 28
Page
Cultural practices for vegetable crops-
Continued.
Beans . 28
Sweet corn 32
Tomatoes 33
Peppers 36
Eggplant 37
Squashes and pumpkins 37
Melons 39
Cucumbers - 40
Sweetpotatoes 41
Fruits for the subsistence gardens 42
Strawberries 43
R aspberries 44
Blackberries . 45
Dewberries 46
Grapes 46
Apples _- 49
Pears..... 50
Peaches 52
Plums 53
Cherries 53
Reference publications _ __ 54
INTRODUCTION
FETJITS AND VEGETABLES will naturally form an important
part of the diet of families undertaking subsistence farming as a
means of supplementing their food supplies and occupying their
spare time. The supply of fruits and vegetables in most cases will
be produced by methods differing more or less from those employed
in regular farm gardens. This bulletin has been prepared with the
limitations clearly in mind, under which the average subsistence
homesteader is working, and includes brief cultural directions for
about 20 of the most important garden vegetables, 5 of the small
fruits, and 5 of the standard or tree fruits. The information con-
tained herein applies mainly to climatic and other conditions pre-
vailing in the Northern and Eastern States; the bulletin is not in-
tended for distribution in the Cotton States, the Great Plains region,
or the Pacific coast region. Moré complete cultural information
may be obtained from the regular gardening bulletins of the United
States Department of Agriculture and the State colleges and experi-
ment stations.


[page 5]

2 FARMERS' BULLETIN" 17 46
SOILS AND FERTILIZERS
Land that is available far subsistence farms may not always be of
high quality or fertility, and every expedient will be necessary in
order to produce reasonably good crops of fruits and vegetables on
it during the first few years. In the course of time the land may
be improved and made more productive. In any case the best land
available should be selected for the garden. Where poultry or a
cow is kept as a part of the subsistence-farming plan, the manure
can be used to advantage on the garden and truck patch. In the
absence of manure, certain soil-improving crops such as soybeans,
clover, or even rye, can be grown and turned under to add humus to
the soil. The moderate use of commercial fertilizer is recommended
wherever it is obtainable and its use would be justified by increased
production.
Wherever there is opportunity to choose the location of the vege-
table garden, a southern or southeastern exposure should be selected ;
locations on low ground or where there is any danger of overflow
should be avoided. Good drainage is important because wet soils
are usually unproductive and cannot be worked early in the spring.
Sandy loams and light clay loams are considered best for growing
vegetables, but heavy clay loams can be made to produce good
yields of most garden crops if they are lightened and improved by
the addition of manure or some other form of organic matter. Com-
posts of leaves, straw, and other waste products are often cheap
sources of humus. Ten tons of manure will not be too much to
plow under to improve the soil of a half-acre garden at the start, and
this can be supplemented by applications of 4 or 5 loads of partly
rotted manure each season if the manure can be secured. Poultry
manure should be saved during the winter and kept dry, then spread
on the garden early in the spring. It must be remembered that
poultry manure is quite strong and must be used sparingly when
applied near the plants. Sifted coal ashes or sand may be used
moderately to lighten stiff clay soils.
Commercial fertilizers are an excellent source of nitrogen, phos-
phorus, and potash (three important elements needed by plants), but
the value of the fertilizer depends almost entirely upon the amounts
of these essential ingredients that it contains. Four hundred to five
hundred pounds of a high-grade garden fertilizer such as one having
a guaranteed analysis of 5 percent nitrogen, 10 percent phosphorus,
and 6 percent potash, or some similar mixture, will generally be suffi-
cient for a half-acre garden, especially if the land has been manured.
Some crops like corn, potatoes, cabbage, onions, and lettuce require
more fertilizer than snap beans, tomatoes, and peas. A portion of the
fertilizer can be applied when the land is being fitted for planting;
then the remainder can be used for top-dressing or side-dressing
along the rows of plants during the growing period.
PREPARING THE SOIL FOR PLANTING
The depth to plow or spade the garden will depend upon the
character and the depth of the surface soil. Where the topsoil is
8 or 10 inches deep it should be worked to that depth, but where the
topsoil is less than 6 inches deep, care should be taken to avoid bring-


[page 6]

SUBSISTENCE FARM GARDENS 3
ing any considerable amount of the subsoil to the surface, although
it is a good plan to loosen the subsoil 6 to 8 inches deeper than the
topsoil is turned. This can be done by the method known as trench-
ing. Trenching should be done in the fall and early winter at such
times as the condition of the soil and weather are suitable. The
work of trenching may be made much easier if the land is handled
in strips. Beginning at one side of the plot to be trenched the top-
soil of a strip about 2 or 2% feet in width is taken off and piled
at one side. The subsoil is then broken as deep as possible with or-
dinary garden tools and then the topsoil from the adjoining strip
no. 2 is thrown over to form the topsoil on strip no. 1. The subsoil
of strip no. 2 is then broken up and the topsoil from strip no. 3 is
turned over upon strip no. 2 and so on until the far side of the plot
of ground is reached; then a wheelbarrow is employed and the top-
soil from strip no. 1 is carted across and becomes the topsoil of the
last strip to be worked. This involves considerable work but greatly
improves the character of the soil, and can often be done a little at
a time. Coarse manure, cleanings from the poultry house, or almost
any form of compost or organic matter may be worked into the
subsoil to loosen and improve it.
Where the garden is plowed with a team or tractor the soil should
be harrowed very soon after plowing, in order to pulverize the
lumps. In case the garden is spaded it is a good plan to break the
lumps with the edge of the spade or spading fork as each spadeful
is turned, and when a strip 5 or 6 feet in width has been spaded,
the soil should be well raked to break the remaining lumps. The
secret of getting a good seedbed is to pulverize the soil to the full
depth that it is plowed or spaded. Under no circumstances should
the soil be plowed or spaded when it is so wet that it will stick to-
gether in a ball when a small amount is squeezed in the palm of
the hand, as being worked while wet will cause the soil to bake and
become hard. Sandy loam soils can be worked sooner after a rain
or irrigation than heavy clay soils, but even the sandy soils are in-
jured if worked when they are too wet. After plowing, the soil
may require repeated harrowing or dragging to break the lumps
and make it fairly firm, as a very loose soil soon dries out and causes
the plants to suffer for moisture.
WATERING THE GARDEN
The use of water on gardens will prove of benefit at some time
during practically every gardening season; the method of applying
it will depend upon the source of supply, the character of the land,
and various other factors. In some cases water can be pumped from
a spring, a well, or from a small stream; in other cases the water
can be drawn from a city or town water supply, but the main point
is to apply it when it is needed, and to give the plants enough to do
them some real good. Market gardeners frequently employ over-
head sprinkler systems for applying the water ; others use the furrow
system, running the water in small streams along the rows of plants;
while in still other cases where the land is perfectly level the surface
may be flooded and then the surplus water drawn off. Of these
three systems the one where the water is run in the small furrows


[page 7]

4 FARMERS' BULLETIN 174 6
along the rows is perhaps the most satisfactory for use in the sub-
sistence garden. Under no conditions should the plants be sprinkled
at frequent intervals, but the soil should be allowed to become rea-
sonably dry and then given a thorough wetting, after which no more
water will be required until the soil again becomes slightly dry.
Water, even in small quantities, is a great help m the setting
of plants in the garden. The proper method of applying the water
is to dig the holes and set the plants in them with a small amount
of soil packed rather firmly about the roots. From a pint to a
quart of water should then be poured into the hole and allowed to
settle into the soil ; the hole should then be filled completely with the
soil in its natural state. In case newly set plants are given a second
watering a day or two after being set, small pockets or holes should
be made alongside of the plants and these should be filled with water ;
then, after the water settles into the soil the holes should be filled
with soil.
Where water is supplied from a hose it should be allowed to run
in a soft stream between the rows rather than to be thrown force-
fully from a nozzle. The average subsistence gardener will be de-
pendent upon local water supplies from wells or streams, and very
simple methods of distributing the water should be worked out.
Mulching around the plants with straw or coarse manure or any
material of like character will aid materially in conserving moisture
during dry periods.
SEEDS FOR THE GARDEN
Seeds for the subsistence garden should always be arranged for and
on hand well in advance of the planting season. In many cases the
orders for garden seeds are pooled by groups of gardeners, and this
results in considerable saving in the cost to the individual gardeners.
Under normal conditions the seeds required to plant a half-acre
garden, exclusive of seed potatoes and sweetpotato plants, will cost
from $3 to $5, but by purchasing in quantity the necessary seed
supply may often be obtained for $2 to $3. The cost of seeds, how-
ever, depends very largely upon the crops planted. If considerable
quantities of peas and beans are planted the seed bill will be rela-
tively high, as these are among the most expensive items in the seed
budget. Seed potatoes are one of the most expensive items, but a
small saving can be made when the potatoes are purchased in quan-
tity and distributed to the various gardeners. In the case of sweet-
potato plants the southern-grown plants can often be used, or a
number of gardeners may combine in the construction of a small
furnace-heated plant bed in which to grow their supply of sweet-
potato plants. In purchasing seeds for the subsistence garden only
high-grade seeds should be considered, even though the cost may be a
little more. The use of poor seeds is very frequently the cause of
failure and disappointment and low-grade seeds should not be used
under any conditions.
Seedsmen who supply the seeds for subsistence gardens should be
required to give guaranty as to both the germination and the general
quality of the seeds furnished.
When the seeds are received they should be carefully unpacked
and checked and kept where they will be reasonably dry and at


[page 8]

SUBSISTENCE FAKM GAEDEXS O
alioiit a living-room temperature, also where there "will be no chance
of mice or rats destroying them.
Any seeds that are left from the planting of the garden should be
carefully kept. Certain kinds of seeds will keep over from year to
year, or second or even third plantings of some of the vegetables
may be desirable. In some cases gardeners have been very success-
ful in the saving of certain seeds from their own gardens. This is
true of peas, beans, tomatoes, cucumbers, squashes, melons, and several
other of the vegetables that form their seeds the same season that the
crop is planted.
H -
»iáw^. . ^UHaäjH
■ 1 1
1 IT mÊL-
■ H
.¿S '■. ' '■'>'" A / 7 / ^^ v
■^ ^. ^^^ :.<■
^^^■■B FiouiiE 1.-Window box for starting early plants in tlie house.
The particular variety of any crop to plant will depend somewhat
upon local conditions, and the inexperienced gardener should always
seek the advice of the county agent or some local gardener who has
had years of experience in the growing of vegetables for home use.
Kecently there have been developed a number of varieties of dis-
ease-resistant vegetables, and these should be used whenever there is
any reason to believe that the diseases to which the varieties are
resistant may be present in the soil. Certain diseases are carried with
the seed, but the average gardener has very little control over this
except that he may insist upon being furnished with seed that has
been treated for the control of these seed-borne diseases.
STARTING EARLY PLANTS
Earliness is of very great importance with a number of the trans-
planted crops like tomatoes, peppers, lettuce, and cabbage. Consider-
able time can often be gained by starting the plants in the house, using
a window box of the type shown in figure 1. The window box can
sometimes be supplemented by the use of a small coldframe, such as is


[page 9]

(i FARMERS' BULLETIX 1746
shown in figure 2. By the comhination of the window hox and the
coldfraine all of the early plants required for planting in the garden
can be grown and ready to set out by the time the weather is warm
enough. If the gardener is compelled to wait until the plants can be
grown outdoors much valuable time will be lost in getting the crops
ready for use.
A box or traj"- in which to start early seedlings should "be about
3 inches deep and of the right size to fit into a south window of the
living room or kitchen. Any good, light soil will do for starting
the plants, but it should be sifted and enough old-rotted manure
FIOCBE 2,-Preparation ot a sash-covered frame for starting early plants.
mixed with it to make it hold moisture and be rich enough to insure
a good growth. The seeds may be sown in rows as indicated in
figure 1, and tl^ should be covered just deep enough to insure the
proper amount of moisture to make them germinate. Care must be
taken that the little seedlings are not overwatered, as an excess of
water will often cause the appearance of a disease known as " damp-
ing off " which causes the plants to rot off at the surface of the
ground. Careful watering and plenty of air and sunshine will ward
off this disease.
When the plants have formed about one leaf in addition to their
two seed leaves they should be transplanted to other boxes of soil
or to the coldframe where they will have more room to spread out
and develop plenty of roots. Later when the weather becomes warm
the plants will be ready for planting in the garden. The coldframe
may need to be protected during cold nights by spreading old matting,
burlap bags, straw, or regular hotbed mats over it. On bright, sunny
days the bed must be opened and the plants given a reasonable amount
of air because if the temperature is allowed to run too high the plants
will grow weak and spindling; in fact, G0o to 70° F. is about the right
temperature for growing most plants.


[page 10]

SUBSISTENCE FARM GARDENS
Glazed sash 3 by 6 feet in size are the best covering for a cold-
frame, but heavy unbleached muslin makes a fair covering and it can
be kept rolled up and off the bed during bright warm days and put on
again before the plants become chilled as the sun goes down.
FIGURE 3.- A small hand cultivator, a desirable addition to the garden equipment.
TOOLS
Elaborate or expensive tools are not necessary for the cultivation
of a subsistence garden. For a small garden, that is, one-fourth acre
or less, a spade or spading fork, a hoe, a steel rake, a line for laying
off the rows, a gar-
den trowel, and a
watering can will be
sufficient. For a one-
half acre garden it
will be desirable to
have a wheelbarrow
on the place and also
a wheel hoe or hand
cultivator of the type
shown in figure 3. A
combination wheel
hoe and seed drill is
desirable for use on
gardens of one-half
acre to an acre. On
subsistence gardens
where a horse is kept
it is desirable to in-
clude a one-horse cultivator having several sizes of shovels and
sweeps, as shown in figure 4. It pays to secure tools of good quality,
then give them proper care, clean them after they are used, and keep
them stored in a
dry place. If this
rule is followed
the tools will re-
main in good con-
dition for many
years.
Some form of
sprayer or duster
will be required for
the control of dis-
eases and insects.
The air-pressure
sprayer shown in
figure 5 is one of
the best pieces of
equipment for use
in the small garden^ but in the large garden and when there are fruit
trees to be sprayed a wheelbarrow or barrel-type spray pump will be
necessary. Very frequently one of these sprayers will serve for three
or four gardeners and may be owned jointly or, what is perhaps a better
58941°-38 2
FIGURE 4- -A five-shovel cultivator with attachments, adapted for garden cultivation.


[page 11]

8 FARMERS' BULLETIN 1746
plan, will be owned by one of the gardeners and a small charge made
for its use. There are several forms of dusters on the market, includ-
ing the plunger, fan, and bellows types. The main point in selecting
spraying and dusting equipment for use in the garden is to have at-
tachments that will deliver the spray or the dust on the underside
of the leaves. This is especially desirable for the control of aphids,
Mexican bean beetles, and other
insects that work mainly on the
underside of the leaves.
DISEASE AND INSECT CONTROL
Anyone who plants vegetables or
fruits without making definite plans
for the control of insect pests and
diseases is headed for sure failure.
It is not necessary to spend large
sums of money for advertised ma-
terials in order to control insects
and diseases ; quite often the reverse
is true. Frequently a home remedy,
if properly applied, will give just
as much protection. Hand picking
of the larger insects has been prac-
ticed ever since man planted his
first garden, and when this practice
is persistently followed the need for
expensive poisons is lessened. The
destruction of the refuse of each
crop immediately after it is har-
vested prevents the continued breed-
ing of large numbers of insects,
which may migrate to later crops
or to winter quarters. Community
effort in cleaning up weeds, trash,
and brush in which insects spend
the winter will greatly reduce the crop of pests for the next year.
When it becomes necessary to use insecticides, there are two main
types to be considered-stomach poisons and contact insecticides.
Stomach poisons are materials used to kill insects by poisoning
their food. It is not necessary to strike the insects with these
poisons, but they must be placed on the plants on which the insects
feed. The most common stomach poisons are paris green, lead
arsenate, calcium arsenate, and magnesium arsenate.
Contact insecticides are used to kill insects which suck juices from
the inside of the plants and by so feeding do not take up poison
placed on the surface of the leaves and stems. It is therefore neces-
sary to apply a contact spray or dust directly to the insect. The
most common contact sprays are nicotine, pyrethrum, and soap com-
binations. Nicotine is very widely used as a dust.
Owing to their peculiar habits of securing food, some insects can-
not be controlled by either of these types of sprays or dusts. Other
materials, therefore, such as bichloride of mercury, bordeaux mix-
FlGURH 5. A
suitable compressed-air for larger gardens.


[page 12]

SUBSISTENCE FARM GARDENS 9
ture, and poisoned bait must be resorted to. To avoid arsenical
residue on the plants, a material known as " rotenone ", which is both
a stomach poison and a contact poison, has come into common use.
The present source of rotenone is derris and cubé root. The stomach
poisons are cheaper and remain on the plants longer ; hence they are
used whenever possible.
SPRAYING AND DUSTING EQUIPMENT
There are available on the market various types and makes of
equipment adapted for use in the home garden. The choice of a
sprayer or duster depends on the size of the garden and the amount
of money available for such equipment. Generally speaking, a
3-gallon compressed-air sprayer or a duster of the bellows or rotary
type is advised. These can be obtained with attachments to place
the dust or spray on the underside of the leaves. Small hand atom-
izer sprayers and plunger-type dusters are too small for the aver-
age home garden. Because certain insects feed almost entirely on
the underside of the leave«, it is almost impossible to reach them with
poisons applied from a cloth bag, sprinkling can. or a can with holes
punched in the bottom.
STANDARD REMEDIES
As suggested in preceding paragraphs, there are certain remedies
for disease and insect troubles that have become more or less stand-
ardized, and one mixture may serve for the control of the diseases or
insects affecting several different crops. Furthermore, there are
cases, like potatoes, where combination sprays or dusts may be used
to control both the diseases and the insects at one application.
Spray materials may be purchased in small amounts from seeds-
men, nurserymen, florists, and hardware and other dealers. Direc-
tions for use will usually be found on the package; also information
as to the nature of the material, whether an arsenate of lead, bor-
deaux mixture, a nicotine sulphate, a wettable sulphur, etc.
The following discussion includes those spray materials herein
recommended for use:
Arsenate of lead is for use in controlling leaf-eating insects. It
is purchased as a white powder and is deadly poisonous to man
and animals as well as to insects. It is used at the rate of about
1 ounce (2 heaping tablespoonfuls) in 3 gallons of water. It is com-
monly sold under its own name, or ready-mixed with one of the
other sprays, such as bordeaux mixture or wettable sulphur, with
which it is commonly used. TMs poison* should not he used except
where washing uMl remove all spray or dust residues.
Bordeaux mixture may be made at home as described on page
11. It may be purchased as a dry powder or paste under various
proprietary names. If the label on the package states that the
active ingredient is copper and that the material is for use on fruit
trees, grapevines, potatoes, etc., the buyer may be certain that the
contents are bordeaux, regardless of the proprietary name.
Lime-sulphur, a clear, amber-colored fluid, is used in winter at the
rate of 1 pint to 1 gallon of water, and during the growing season
at the rate of 1 pint in 5 gallons of water. It is sometimes sold in


[page 13]

10 F ARMEES * BULLETIN 17 46
the dry state. One-half pound of the dry material equals 1 pint of
fluid.
Nicotine sulphate is useful in the control of sucking insects (plant
lice or aphids). It is sold under various proprietary names and
can be identified by the analysis on the label. It should be used
as described on page 11.
Oil emulsion and miscible oils are sold under various trade names
and can be identified by reading the labels. These oils and emul-
sions are useful in the control of scale insects, and should be applied
only when the trees are wholly dormant.
Wettable sulphur is sold under a variety of trade names and
can usually be identified by the word " sulphur " in the analysis
given on the label, but it should not be confused with lime-sulphur,
which is either a clear amber fluid or a powder that forms such a
fluid when mixed with water. Wettable sulphur mixed with water
forms a white to cream-colored or yellowish fluid. It should be
used at the rate of about one-half pound to 5 gallons of water, or
as directed on the package.
Sulphur dust is a specially prepared, finely ground sulphur which
may be bought by itself and mixed with arsenate of lead at the
rate of 9 parts of sulphur to 1 part of the arsenate of lead when
needed, or the two may sometimes be bought readv mixed.
Copper-lime dust may be used in place of the bordeaux-mixture
spray but is generally not as effective as the spray. It may be
bought ready-mixed and with or without arsenate of lead.
STOMACH POISONS
Paris green
Spray:
Paris green_- 2 level teaspoons 1 [2/3 pound
Hydrated lime 6 level teaspoons >or< 2 pounds
Water 1 gallon J [50 gallons
Dust:
Paris green 1 level teaspoon \ori 1 pound
Hydrated lime or flour 1 pint / \ 12 pounds
Calcium arsenate
Spray:
Calcium arsenate. _ ^ 6 level teaspoons "j f 1 pound
Hydrated lime 12 level teaspoons >or< 2 pounds
Water 1 gallon J [50 gallons
Dust:
Calcium arsenate 2 level teaspoons \ori 1 pound
Hydrated lime or flour 1 pint / \7 pounds
Poisoned-bran bait
Paris green 2 level teaspoons
Wheat bran 5 pounds
Molasses }i pint
Water 5 quarts
Mix the paris green and dry wheat bran together so that every
particle of the bran will receive a coating of the paris green. Dis-
solve the molasses in the water. Add the liquid to the dry mate-
rials slowly and mix thoroughly, making a rather dry mash.


[page 14]

SUBSISTENCE FARM GARDENS 11
Scatter the bait thinly, about sundown, near plants to be pro-
tected. The worms crawl out at night and eat the poisoned bran.
If the garden is to be planted where heavy vegetation grew last
fall, it would be advisable to scatter bait over the entire garden
just before planting.
CONTACT POISONS
Nicotine sulphate
Spray:
Nicotine sulphate (40 percent nicotine) ___ 1 teaspoon "l i% pint
Soap, any kind 1 cubic inch >or< 3 pounds
Water 1 gallon J (,50 gallons
Dust:
Nicotine sulphate (40-percent nicotine) 1 ounce *lf3% pounds
Hydrated lime 2 pints j \50 pounds
Nicotine dust is most effective if applied when the air is still and
the temperature high, preferably above 75° F. Nicotine dust must
be very thoroughly mixed in order to secure a uniform blending of
the ingredients and must be applied as soon as mixed or kept in
a tight container to prevent the loss of the nicotine.
FUNGICIDES (FOB DISEASE CONTROL)
Bordeaux mixture
Pulverized bluestone (copper sulphate) 4 level tablespoons or 4 pounds
dissolved in
Water 2 quarts or 25 gallons
Hydrated lime 6 level tablespoons or 6 pounds
suspended in
Water 2 quarts or 25 gallons
Dissolve the pulverized bluestone in the water in an earthen or
wooden vessel. (Bluestone is corrosive to some metals, particularly
iron.) Place the hydrated lime in the second portion of water and
stir it; then pour the bluestone solution into the limewater while
stirring.
Bordeaux mixture should be made fresh for each application. If
old bordeaux is applied it may cause injury to plants and result in
unsatisfactory disease or insect control.
COMBINATION INSECTICIDES AND FUNGICIDES
Certain combination dusts and sprays may be made and thus con-
trol both insects and diseases at one application. For example,
arsenical poisons may be added to bordeaux mixture, or both axseni-
cals and nicotine may be used in combination with bordeaux. To
each 3 gallons of bordeaux 1 ounce of calcium arsenate or magnesium
arsenate, or three-fourths ounce of paris green may be added. This
gives a spray that will control certain leaf diseases and also the in-
sects that eat the foliage. Bordeaux mixture is in itself a repellant
for certain insects, and by the addition of 1 teaspoonful of nicotine
sulphate to each gallon of bordeaux mixture, reasonable control of
leaf hoppers and aphids can be secured in addition to the control of
leaf blight.1
1 For more detailed information on the control of garden diseases and insects consult Farmers' Bulletin No. 1371, Diseases and Insects of Garden Vegetables.


[page 15]

12 FARMERS' BULLETIN" 1746
CULTURAL PRACTICES FOR VEGETABLE CROPS
The following brief discussion of cultural practices is intended to
cover only the main points in the growing of the various crops.
More detailed information can be procured from the bulletins of the
United States Department of Agriculture listed at the end of this
bulletin. The workers in many of the State colleges and experiment
stations have prepared special bulletins containing information
especially adapted to those particular States, and subsistence gar-
deners are advised to write to the extension service of their State col-
lege for copies of these bulletins. Success depends largely upon the
enthusiasm of the gardener and the painstaking care that he is
willing to give his garden or fruit plantings. As already stated,
much of the work of the small subsistence farms will be undertaken
under difficulties, and no one should become discouraged if he does
not attain complete success from the very start.
In the treatment of the crops in this bulletin, those belonging to
the vegetable group are handled from the standpoint of the time of
planting them in the spring rather than by alphabetical or any group
arrangement. It should be borne in mind that the date for planting
these crops varies with locality and elevation above sea level. Cer-
tain crops, such as potatoes, peas, cabbage, onions, kale, spinach, and
lettuce, may be planted before the ground becomes warm or the
danger of frost is past; others, such as snap beans, tomatoes, and
sweet corn should not be planted until practically all danger of frost
is past. Lima beans, peppers, and eggplant should not be planted
until the ground has become warm. Wherever there are experienced
gardeners in the neighborhood, their advice both as to the time and
methods of planting should be sought.
POTATOES
Potatoes are among the most important of the vegetable crops from
a food standpoint. For a family of 4 or 5 persons, 10 to 15 bushels
are required for the entire year. In the more southern sections a
portion of the potato supply can be obtained from sweetpotatoes.
Three to five bushels of early potatoes are considered enough for the
average family, as early potatoes do not keep long and a late crop
is better for winter storage. There are two main varieties of early
potatoes, the Irish Cobbler and the Triumph, sometimes called Bliss
Triumph.
Potatoes can generally be planted just as soon as the ground is
in condition to work because they require from 4 to 6 weeks to come
up. This, in many sections of the Northeast, may be as early as
March 20; however, the first week in April is considered the time for
planting early potatoes in many sections. To the northward the
planting date may not be until the middle of May. One peck of seed
potatoes will plant 300 to 400 feet of row, the potatoes being cut into
pieces having 1 or 2 good eyes, as shown in figure 6. Under favor-
able conditions this will yield 3 to 5 bushels of potatoes suitable for
home use. This will give a basis for calculating the quantity to
plant. For a rather large family-6 or 7 persons-at least one-half
bushel of seed should be planted for the early crop. By careful cut-
ting of thé potatoes this may be made to plant from 700 to 800 feet


[page 16]

S1TBSISTENCE FARM GARDENS 13
of row. The seed should be planted in rows 3 feet apart, with the
pieces 12 to 14 inches apart in the rows and covered 4 inches deep in
light soils and 21/2 to 3 inches deep in the heavier soils.
The greatest benefits from the use of fertilizer have been procured
where it is drilled along both sides of the seed pieces and at about the
same depth as the seed. The fertilizer should be kept at least 3 inches
away from the seed pieces. One method of planting potatoes in the
home garden is to open a flat-bottomed furrow about 4 inches deep
and 8 inches wide. Place the seed pieces in the center and a trickle of
fertilizer along each side ; then, with the hoe, cover both the seed pieces
and the fertilizer. This method will usually insure the best results.
Potatoes require no special cultivation except to be kept free from
weeds and to be hilled up with soil as they develop in order to create
a ridge in which the potatoes may form without being exposed to the
FIGURE 6.-I'otato soed cut into «hunkj- ratbei than thin wedge-shaped iiieces.
light, usually about four cultivations and as many hand hoeings
are required. The work can be done entirely with the hoe. or where a
horse is available a one-horse cultivator should be used.
Early potatoes may be dug about the time that the vines die or
shortly afterward. Some of the potatoes may be dug for use while
the vines are still fairly green, and in no case should the potatoes be
left in the ground more than a week or 10 days after the vines are
completely dead. When the potatoes are dug they should be exposed
to the sun and wind for not more than 1 hour, and should then be
stored in a cool, well-ventilated cellar or in an open shed where they
will be cool but protected from the light. If stored in too large quan-
tities or where they will not get air, the early potatoes are likely to rot.
Green Mountain, Küsset Rurals, Jersey Red Skins, Irish Cobbler,
and several other varieties are used for the main or late crop which
produces the winter supply. These are grown in the same manner as
early potatoes and as a rule are not dug until after frost has killed the
vines. The late crop should be stored in cellars or some place where
they can be kept at a temperature between 45° and 50° F.


[page 17]

14 FARMERS ' BULLETIN 1746
POTATO DISEASES
Scab.-Common scab is due to a disease organism that lives in the
soil; it produces rough-pitted spots on the potatoes. The disease
remains in the soil from year to year, and is also carried on the pota-
toes that are used for seed.
Control.-If possible, avoid planting on land that has produced
scabby potatoes. Do not use badly scabbed potatoes for seed, and
treat all seed potatoes just before cutting in a solution of formalde-
hyde or of mercuric chloride. Soak the seed 2 hours in formaldehyde
solution (1 ounce in 2 gallons of water) or for 30 minutes in a solution
of mercuric chloride made by dissolving the little coffin-shaped tablets
at the rate of 1 to each pint of water. Thß mercvrric chloride should
be used only in wooden w stoneware vessels. It is a deadly poison and
must he kept away from children and all animals., Both the formal-
dehyde and mercuric chloride can be purchased at drug stores.
Early blight.-Early blight usually appears in early July in the
Northern States, causing dark, roundish to irregular spots with char-
acteristic target-board markings on the leaves. Moist warm weather
is most favorable for its development.
Control.-Spray the plants with a 4-6-50 bordeaux mixture, begin-
ning when the disease is first seen. Eepeat spraying every 10 to 14
days in dry weather, and every 7 to 10 days in moist weather. See
page 11 for method of preparing bordeaux mixture.
Late blight.-Under weather conditions favorable for late blight,
it appears in midsummer on the leaves and stems, causing irregular
dead areas. In moist, cool weather the disease spreads very fast,
killing the plants in a few days. Later it produces a brown rotting
of the potatoes.
Control.-Spray with bordeaux mixture, as for early blight.
Virus diseases.-The so-called " running out " of potatoes is due
mainly to the presence of virus diseases, which weaken and dwarf
the plants, causing greatly reduced yields.
Control.-These diseases are carried with the seed and cannot be
controlled by any form of seed treatment. The planting of seed po-
tatoes that have been grown under inspection and that are sold under
a State certification tag is the gardener's only safeguard against loss
from virus diseases. It may be possible to secure seed potatoes that
have not been grown under inspection and yet are reasonably free
from virus diseases, but the use of seed that is certified by some offi-
cial agency in the State where they are grown is the safest course to
follow.
INSECTS AFFECTING POTATOES
The most important insects that injure potato leaves and stems
are Colorado potato beetles, leaf hoppers, flea beetles, and aphids
(plant lice). The spray materials suggested in the following para-
graphs to control the different pests can be combined to give an
all-around spray. For the best results against leaf hoppers, bor-
deaux mixture should be applied about every 10 days from the time
the plants are 6 inches high until harvest. When potato beetles or
flea beetles are present, add a stomach poison; when aphids are
present, add nicotine.


[page 18]

SUBSISTENCE FARM GARDENS 15
Colorado potato beetles.-The yellow and black striped Colorado
potato beetles and their ugly brick-red slugs are known to every
grower of potatoes, and are usually referred to as " potato bugs "
(fig-7).
Control.-The gardener with only a few potatoes can prevent seri-
ous injury from potato beetles by hand-picking or brushing off and
killing the beetles. By examining the under side of the leaves the
clusters of orange-colored eggs can be located and crushed. The
hand-picking should be repeated at least twice a week. Fortunately,
the greedy feeding of this insect makes it easy to control with an
arsenical spray or dust. All portions of the plants should be cov-
ered with the poison. Either the paris green or the calcium arsenate
formulas, when thoroughly and properly mixed, will give satis-
factory results.
See page 10 for instructions on how to prepare spray and dust
mixtures containing paris green.
Aphids.-Aphids are the tiny greenish- or pinkish-colored plant
lice found clustered on the terminal shoots or on the under side of
the leaves. These in-
sects feed by sucking ¿4Ë3^±, V^^L-^-^O'
when abundant enough, (^^^^S^\ /«ïfR^T^m ^ÈSÊÊrÊè-
cause the leaves to í ÍÍ^^SEjH'\' .^íflwiilrW ^^^S^ff
curl, often enclosing \T*l^^gj7r\ ftilW/ffl >M^^^^
Control.-In order NM|§89JÍ A NSII^V ^IP^
to control these insects ^j^^r a o
, , . j.' 'i FIGURE 7.-Colorado potato beetle: a. Beetle; b, larva or a contact insecticide, "slug"; c, pupa. (Chittenden.)
such as nicotine, when
the air is still and the temperature high. Either the spray or the
dust formula may be used.
Leafhoppers.-Leafhoppers are minute, active, greenish or yel-
lowish insects. The adults possess wings and, upon Deing disturbed,
fly readily for short distances. The immature forms (called nymphs)
when disturbed do not fly but scuttle rapidly over the surfaces
of the leaves with a sidewise, crablike motion. Both adults
and nymphs rest and feed mostly on the under surfaces of the leaves
and thus escape notice, even though they may be present in large
numbers. These tiny insects collect in potato fields during hot, dry
seasons and produce hopperburn or tip blight. Hopperburn of
potatoes appears as brown, and later as blackened, areas at the tips
and borders of the leaves. This injury seriously interferes with the
crop of tubers.
Control.-The most satisfactory remedy is a thorough application
of bordeaux mixture, made according to the formula given on
page 11.
Flea beetles.-Flea beetles, as the name implies,, are small, dark-
colored beetles which, when disturbed, jump away in a manner simi-
lar to that of a flea. They injure plants by gnawing small holes
through the leaves, which often appear as though fine shot had been
fired through them. The beetles usually feed from the under side
58941 0-38 3


[page 19]

16 FARMERS' BULLETIN 17 46
of the leaves, which should be taken into account when sprays are
applied.
Coontrol.-The combination spray of bordeaux mixture and a
poison, referred to in the first paragraph under potato insects, will
give satisfactory control. Calcium arsenate dust or bordeaux mix-
ture, used alone, will give some relief if applied when the beetles
first appear and if repeated in about a week.
PEAS
Peas may be planted just as early in the spring as the ground can
be worked. The rows should be 30 inches to 3 feet apart. A pint
of seed peas will plant 100 feet of row. On light and sandy loam
soils the seed peas should be covered about 2 inches deep; on clay
and heavy soils 1 to l1/^ inches is sufficient. There are several
varieties of dwarf peas such as Little Marvel and Laxtonian which
do not require supports. The Thomas Laxton and the Gradus are
two of the standard varieties which grow 18 inches to 2 feet in
height; the old-fashioned Telephone, which grows 3 to 5 feet in
height, is an excellent late variety, but it must be provided with brush
or wire supports. The Alaska and the Improved Alaska are ex-
tremely early sorts. These are what are termed smooth peas, that
is, the seeds are not wrinkled. The quality of the smooth varieties
is not quite equal to that of the wrinkled sorts. Peas that are left
on the vines to ripen can be hulled and saved for seed. By planting
three different varieties or by making successive plantings of the
same variety a supply of peas for the table can be maintained over
a period of 4 or 5 weeks. Fresh peas not required for immediate
use may be canned, but peas are one of the most difficult of all
vegetables to can.
PEA DISEASES
Pod spot.-Dark spots sometimes appear on the pods of peas.
This trouble, called pod spot, is caused by an organism that also
produces spots on the leaves and on the seed, in which it is carried
from one season to the next.
Control.-There is no treatment for a diseased crop. The disease
can be partially prevented by planting disease-free seed. The vines
of a diseased crop should be gathered and burned.
INSECTS AFFECTING PEAS
Pea aphids.-Pea vines having made a good start are often checked
and gradually wither, turn yellow, and in some cases shed their
leaves. If the plants are shaken, small green aphids, no larger than
the head of a common pin, fall to the ground. Upon closer examina-
tion the terminal shoots and leaves may be found crowded with
either winged or wingless forms of these plant lice.
Control.-Nicotine dust or spray (p. 11) gives the most satisfactory
control. The aphids can be beaten from the vines onto the ground
by means of a brush of small twigs or a pine bough with the leaves
left on. If the brushing is done on a hot, sunny day, when the
weather is hot many are killed by the heat of the ground, and few,
if any, ever return to the plants.
Seed-corn maggot.-See discussion under bean insects, page 31.
Cutworms.-See discussion under cabbage insects, page 22.


[page 20]

SUBSISTENCE FARM GARDENS 17
ONIONS
Onions may be planted just as early as the ground can be worked;
in fact, in many sections onions may be put in the ground during the
fall and given slight protection during the winter. This is especially
true of the multiplier or bunch onions. Standard varieties of onions
like White Portugal, Eiverside Sweet Spanish, Southport YelloAv
Globe, Red Wethersfield, and Japanese may be grown in the North
from seed, from small southern-grown plants, or from the little onion
sets which are sold in the stores. Riverside Sweet Spanish, Early
Grano, Creoles, and Bermudas are among the varieties adapted for
growing in the Southern States. One to two quarts of onion sets
will be needed to supply the onions required by the average family
during the early part of the season. They should be planted in rows
18 inches apart with the sets 2 to 3 inches apart in the rows. The
little sets should be placed right side up in a shallow furrow and
covered with about 1 inch of soil. Onions are grown almost entirely
by hand cultivation. When the onions approach maturity the soil
should not be drawn around them; their ripening may be hastened
by rolling an empty barrel over the row, or by breaking down the
tops with the back of a hoe. This causes the onions to ripen uni-
formly, after which they may be pulled, dried, the tops removed, and
the bulbs stored in a cool dry place. Onions require a very rich
soil, and in addition to plenty of fertilizer being used before the
plants or sets are planted, they should have at least one side dress-
ing of fertilizer during the growing period. Where onions are
grown from seed, the seed is drilled thinly in the rows and covered
about 1 inch; then when the plants are about 2 inches high, they are
thinned so as to stand l1^ inches apart. Sets are used for planting
most of the onions grown in home gardens, but seed is used very
largely for starting the commercial crop.
ONION DISEASES
Smut.-Onion smut is caused by a disease organism that lives in
the soil where smutted onions have grown. It produces blisters
full of black powder on the leaves of young plants, killing them.
Control.-Where onions are grown from seed, sprinkle formalde-
hyde solution (1 teaspoonful to 1 quart of water) in the drill after
the seed has been dropped, before covering them, using 3 to 4 quarts
of the solution in each 100 feet of row.
Mildew.-Onion mildew may be noticed on the leaves on a dewy
morning when a violet, furry covering may be seen on the surface.
The leaves turn pale green and finally yellowish, and the diseased
portions of the plants eventually collapse. The disease commonly
starts in spots and spreads to surrounding areas.
Control.-Onion mildew usually appears in midseason and may be
held in check by thorough cultivation and by spraying the foliage
thoroughly with a 4-6-50 bordeaux mixture to which 3 pounds of
rosin-fish-oil soap has been added as a sticker. (For full instructions
for making bordeaux mixture see p. 11.)


[page 21]

18 FARMERS' BULLETIN 174 6
INSECTS ATTACKING ONIONS
The most common insect pests of onions are maggots and thrips.
Onion maggot.-The onion maggot is a small white maggot that
bores through the underground portion of the onion, causing the
plant to become flabby and turn yellow.
Control.-There is no control after the maggot has entered the
bulb, but in gardens where onions are subject to injury, the young
maggots can be killed before they enter the onions by pouring a
bichloride of mercury solution, as suggested for the cabbage maggot
(p. 23), along the row. Make the first application when the onions
are about l1^ inches high, and repeat in about 5 days.
Thrips.-Thrips are tiny, elongated insects that feed underneath
the leaf sheaths and produce mottled leaves.
Control.-Nicotine-soap spray as described on page 11 is suggested
to control this pest. LETTUCE
Lettuce is what most gardeners term a cool-weather crop, that is,
it can be planted early in the spring while the weather is still
fairly cool, and must be brought to maturity and used before hot
weather sets in. This is especially true of head lettuce, and about
the only way to grow good head lettuce in many sections is to start
the plants in a hotbed or coldframe and transplant them to the
open ground about as early in the spring as the soil can be worked.
Good head lettuce of the Iceberg type can be grown almost any-
where if the plants are started early enough so that the heads will
form before hot weather. The type of soil is not very important
so long as it is rich and contains plenty of organic matter to hold
moisture; in fact, almost any good garden soil will grow lettuce if
it is properly enriched. Composted manure and commercial ferti-
lizers may both be used to advantage. Lettuce plants grown in-
doors and transplanted should never be set in a furrow but always
on a slight ridge or bed where they will get excellent drainage.
Under no circumstances should the soil be hilled up around the
lettuce plants. The plants of the larger varieties of head lettuce
should be set in rows 15 to 18 inches apart and a foot apart in the
row. When the seed is planted directly in the rows where the plants
are to grow they should be thinned so as to stand at least 9 or 10
inches apart.
The main heading varieties that are grown in home gardens are
New York (which is sold on the market under the name of Iceberg),
Improved Big Boston (sometimes called "Unrivaled"), Mignonette
(which is a small heading variety), and Hanson, another good head-
ing variety. Certain varieties of nonheading or loose-leaf lettuce,
such as Early Curled Simpson, Black Seeded Simpson, and Grand
Rapids, will stand the heat of early summer somewhat better than the
heading varieties, and so where plants of the heading varieties are
planted for the early crop of lettuce, it is good practice to follow up
with the planting of one of the loose-leaved sorts for later use.
Occasional side dressings of nitrate of soda or some other highly
nitrogenous fertilizer will often aid very materially in hastening
the development of the lettuce plants. Too liberal use of nitrogen,
however, will cause the lettuce to be dark green in color, tough, and of
a bitter flavor. Where the lettuce is watered during the growing


[page 22]

SUBSISTENCE FARM GARDENS 19
period the water should be applied around the roots and not
sprinkled over the top. Lettuce requires plenty of moisture, but on
the other hand it will not grow on wet soil or on soil that is sour.
Two plantings of 50 plants each as a rule will be all that can be
used by the average family during the time that lettuce is at its
prime. If the seed is sown in the rows where the crop is to grow,
the thinnings can often be used for the table and the plants that
remain will develop large bunches or heads, depending upon the
variety. A fall crop of lettuce can very often be grown, but the
greatest demand for lettuce as a salad crop is in the spring.
LETTUCE DISEASES
Drop.-Lettuce is subject to attack by 2 or 3 diseases, including
Jettuce drop, which is caused by a fungus that attacks the lettuce
plants near the base and causes them to wilt and later to become
slimy and drop to the ground.
Control,-The remedy for this disease is to plant the lettuce on
ground where the disease has not made its appearance. Where the
drop disease occurs, the pouring of a weak solution of formaldehyde
on the spot where the affected heads are removed will sometimes
kill the hard spore masses that remain in the soil to perpetuate the
disease.
Rot.-Head lettuce that is approaching maturity is especially sub-
ject to a rot that attacks the lower portion of the heads.
Control.-This trouble can be largely avoided by careful water-
ing and by keeping the soil pulled away from the lower portions of
the heads.
Tipburn.-Tipburn is what is commonly called a physiological
disease and results mostly from high temperature after the heads
are formed. It consists of a burning of the edges of the leaves and
frequently extends throughout the entire head, causing its complete
loss.
Control.-The maturing of the heads and their use before hot
weather is about the only way to avoid tipburning. The use of
chemicals in the form of sprays and dusts is of little value in the
control of lettuce diseases.
INSECTS AFFECTING LETTCTOE
Lettuce is attacked principally by springtails, cutworms, and
aphids.
Springtails.-The name " springtail " is derived from the fact that
these insects possess a springlike abdominal appendage that projects
forward alon^ the underside of the body. When disturbed, the in-
sect extends this appendage, which enables it to jump. The spring-
tails feed on decaying vegetation and seedling plants. They require
a certain degree of moisture in order to thrive.
Control.-Dusting the affected area with hydrated lime will pre-
vent damage.
Cutworms.-See discussion on cutworms under Cabbage, page 23.
Aphids.-Aphids or plant lice very frequently attack lettuce
plants that are grown in the house or coldframe. These insects may
be controlled by dusting the plants with nicotine dust. For prep-
aration of nicotine dust see page 11.


[page 23]

20 FARMERS' BULLETIN 1746
RADISHES
Eadishes can be planted early; they grow quickly and constitute a
very appetizing fresh food early in the season when such foods are
rather scarce. Twenty-five or thirty feet of row will be enough for
the average family. The little Scarlet Globe variety, also the va-
riety known as French Breakfast, has been known to be ready for
use in less than 20 days after planting. White Icicle, Lady Finger,
White Strasburg, Long Scarlet Short Top, and Cincinnati Market
are some of the leading varieties of second-early or summer radishes.
One packet each of 2 or 3 varieties may be planted at about the
same time, but they will come to maturity at intervals and will pro-
vide fresh radishes over a period of 4 or 5 weeks.
Eadishes require a fairly rich soil. They should be planted in
rows 18 inches apart, and the plants should be thinned to stand at
least 1% or 2 inches apart in the rows. The seed should be covered
about three-fourths of an inch deep in loam soils, but not more than
one-half inch deep in clay soils. Very little cultivation is required
because the season of growth is so short. They are soon gone, and
some later crop can be planted after them.
In order to save seed of radishes, select a few of the best and
simply leave them in the ground to mature and go to seed. When
the seed pods are beginning to turn brown, the entire top can be
cut off and spread on a sheet to dry, after which the seeds can be
beaten out of the pods with a stick, and then cleaned and stored for
planting the next year.
RADISH DISEASES AND PESTS
Eadishes, as grown in the home garden, are not seriously affected
by either diseases or insect pests.
CABBAGE
Cabbage is native to the cooler sections of Europe. It thrives best
during the winter and early spring in the South and during the cool
portions of the summer in the northern part of the country. There
are very distinct early, medium, and late varieties of cabbage. Those
of the Jersey Wakefield and Charleston Wakefield type, which have
rather small pointed heads, are considered best for early planting,
and 25 to 50 plants will produce all of the early cabbage that can be
consumed by the average family during the early part of the season.
For fall and winter use 100 to 200 plants of a good late variety such
as Late Flat Dutch, All Seasons, or Danish Ballhead should be planted.
On soils where the cabbage yellows disease is present, one of the resist-
ant strains, such as Wisconsin Hollander, should be planted for the
late crop.
The plants for the early crop must be started indoors, or southern-
grown plants may be purchased. The plants for the late crop can be
grown out-of-doors, as it is not necessary to set them in the garden
before the middle of June, or the first of July in many sections. If
the cabbage is planted too early the heads will form in advance of
cool fall weather, and they will burst and be a loss. The ideal way
is to time the planting of the late cabbage so that the heads will reach


[page 24]

SUBSISTEXCE FAKM GAKDEXS 21
their maximum size and solid texture about the time that the first
heavy frosts or light freezing weather occur in the fall. This will
give the best crop of cabbage for storage. Cabbage requires a very
rich soil, also one that does not dry out rapidly but is well drained and
easily worked. In planting the early crop when the soil is likely to
be a trifle wet, it is a good idea to place the plants on slight ridgo.
the rows being 30 to 36 inches apart and the plants 12 to 15 inches
apart in the rows. For the late crop the rows should be 36 to 42
inches apart and the plants set 18 inches apart in the rows.
Side dressings of highly nitrogenous fertilizers will greatly stimu-
late the growth of the cabbage ; the use of too much nitrogen, however,
will produce either solid heads that
will burst before they can be used
or loosely grown heads that are
not especially desirable for storing.
In setting cabbage plants it is al-
ways desirable to pour a little wa-
ter around the roots of each plant
asitisbeingset,toinsuretheplants
taking hold and getting a quick
start. Cabbage, is one of the easi-
est of the garden vegetables to
grow as it requires only 2 or 3 cul-
tivations and 1 or 2 hand hoeings.
It is also one of the most desirable
of the garden vegetables from the
standpoint of vitamin and min-
eral-salt content.
Cabbage may be stored in cool
cellars or buried out-of-doors.
Slight freezing in the pit does not
materially damage the heads;
however, if the freezing is too se-
vere it will cause the cabbage to
soften and rot.
In many sections a crop of late
cabbage can be grown on the same
ground where early peas, spinach,
or lettuce have been produced. In other localities late cabbage is
planted between the rows of early potatoes.
FlGUBE 8.-Cnbbage plant with large
knotted roots caused by clubroot.
CABBAGK DISEASES
Clubroot.-Clubroot of cabbage causes large irregular swellings on
the roots, as shown in figure 8. Diseased plants are stunted, have a
sickly yellow appearance, and often wilt during the heat of the
day. The trouble may attack the plants in the seedbed, or after
they are set out.
Control.-Avoid planting any of the cabbage family on land where
clubroot has occurred in any of several previous years. If rotation
is not possible, apply lime, preferably hydrated, at the rate of 25
pounds per square rod, working it into the soil several months before
planting. See that only healthy plants are planted.


[page 25]

22 FARMEKS' BULLETIX 174(j
Yellows or wilt.-Cabbage plants attacked b}- yellows are stunted,
turn a yellowish green, and the lower leaves fall off. Often one-
sided plants are found, or one side of the leaf may be yellow and the
other side green. Figure Í) shows a cabbage plant that is affected
b}' the yellows disease.
Control.-Practice crop rotation when possible. The surest means
of control consists in the use of seed of yellows-resistant varieties,
several of which are now handled by a number of seedsmen. The yel-
lows-resistant Wisconsin Hol-
lander is a late cabbage; while
Wisconsin All Seasons and Wis-
consin Brunswick are flat types,
somewhat earlier and especial-
ly suitable for making sauer-
kraut. Resistant midseason
strains, Marion Market, Globe,
All Head Select, and an early
strain, Jersey Queen, are now
available from a few seedsmen.
Black rot.-Plants attacked
by black rot usually have yel-
lowed leaves with areas on the
edges showing blackened veins,
and the insides of the stems
show a black ring. Diseased
heads often rot in the field or
in storage
Control.-Pull and burn af-
fected plants as soon as they are
noticed. A long rotation in
which neither cabbage nor re-
lated plants are allowed to grow
on infested land is very impor-
tant. Disinfect seed in mercuric
chloride (see scab of potatoes)
30 minutes, then rinse in clear
water. Plant in seedbed soil
known to be free of black rot.
Blackleg.-Blackleg attacks
cabbage plants while they are
very small, often in the seedbed.
Blackleg is caused by an organism that produces a blackening and
rotting of the stem at about the soil line and on the leaves dark spots
in which tiny black pimples appear. The leaves often turn purple;
later the whole plant wilts so the tips of the leaves rest on the ground.
The disease is carried on the seed, and may be spread by water
spattering on the leaves during sprinkling or during rainstorms.
Control.-Disinfect seed as for black rot. Pull and burn diseased
plants as soon as seen. Water cautiously to avoid wetting the leaves.
FiOORB 9.-Cabbage plant stunted ami leaves
curled by yellows.
INSECTS AFFECTING CABRAiiK
The principal cabbage pests are cabbage worms, aphids, the cab-
bage maggot, and cutworms.


[page 26]

SUBSISTENCE FARM GARDENS 23
Cabbage worms.-There are several kinds of caterpillars that often
feed on cabbage and related plants. The common cabbage worm is
about 1^4 inches long when full grown and of a velvety green ap-
pearance. It is the young of the white butterfly which has black
spots on its wings. When abundant, these worms feed so heavily
upon the heads of cabbage, cauliflower, and other leafy vegetables
that the infested plants are stunted and some of them are rendered
unfit for food. The cabbage looper is similar in size and habits to
the common cabbage worm just described. The larva of the dia-
mond-back moth is another important cabbage pest; this worm is
much smaller than the other two.
Control.-Paris green or calcium arsenate sprays or dusts (see
formula, p. 10), may be used on cabbage until the heads begin to
form, but, because of a poisonous residue, must not be applied too
near harvest. After the heads begin to form, other materials should
be used for control. Satisfactory results have been obtained by
using derris dust containing from three-fourths to 1 percent of rote-
none. Pyrethrum dusts and extracts are also effective.
Aphids.-Cabbage plants in seedbeds and at later stages of their
growth are sometimes covered with clusters of whitish-green plant
lice, about the size of small birdshot. These aphids suck the sap
from the leaves, and such affected leaves curl and crinkle or form
cups, completely lined with the aphids. If the injury is severe, the
plants wilt and die. If the plants are not killed by the aphids they
are often dwarfed, grow slowly, and form small, light heads.
Control.-The most satisfactory method of combating this pest
is by spraying with nicotine and soap solution or dusting with
nicotine dust (p. 11).
Cabbage maggot.-Frequently cabbage plants in the plant bed or
in the garden apparently stop growing, and the leaves change to
a bluish-green color. If one of these plants is pulled, the rootstocks
will be full of mines in which a small white maggot may be found.
This maggot comes from a small fly which lays its eggs on the stem
at the soil line.
Control.-If a small tar-paper disk is slit from one side, laid flat
on the ground, and fitted snugly around the plant at the time the
plant is set in the garden, egg laying will be prevented. There is
no satisfactory control after the maggots have entered the root-
stocks, but one-half cup of bichloride of mercury solution (1 to
1,000) poured around each plant will kill the newly hatched larvae.
Make the first application about 4 days after setting the plants and
repeat in 10 days. Coifin-shaped tablets containing 7.3 grains of
bichloride of mercury can be purchased at drug stores, and one tab-
let dissolved in a pint of water gives a 1 to 1,000 solution. One
ounce of bichloride of mercury dissolved in T1/^ gallons of water
also gives the desired strength. Bichloride of mercury is extremely
poisonous and must be handled carefully. It also corrodes or at-
tacks most metals so should be dissolved and handled in earthen or
\ glass containers.
Cutworms.-There is perhaps no other group of insects so generally
destructive to garden crops as cutworms. Their habit of cutting
off young plants at or near the soil surface at night and hiding
under the soil at or near the base of the plant by clay is well known.
58941°-38 1


[page 27]

24 FARMERS' BULLETIN 1746
Although there are many different kinds of cutworms, varying
greatly in appearance and life habits, the following life cycle is
fairly typical of the entire cutworm group injurious to garden
crops : The adults are dull-brown night-flying moths or millers that
are frequently attracted to lights during the summer months. The
moths are seldom seen during the day. The eggs are deposited on
vegetation or in the soil of weedy or sodded areas during the late
summer. The tiny cutworms hatching from the eggs a few days
later feed on vegetation until cold weather, when they burrow deep
into the soil to pass the winter. In the spring the partially mature
worms come to the surface with a greedy appetite brought about
by the all-winter fast and are ready to destroy the first succulent
garden plants to appear in the spring. The worms complete their
growth by early summer, burrow several inches in the soil, and
change to moths. Some cutworms vary considerably from this
life cycle.
Control.- (1) Since the moths select weedy or sodded areas for
egg laying in late summer, gardens kept cleanly cultivated during
the egg-laying season are less likely to attract the moths. (2)
Fall and winter spading or plowing, where practicable, will turn
many of the immature worms up to the attack of weather and
other natural enemies. (3) In small gardens cutworms can usually
be collected and killed at the base of the plant they have cut down.
(4) The surest method of protecting plants from cutworm attack
is to use poison bran mash, made as described on page 10.
Where a comparatively small number of cabbage plants are be-
ing set in the home garden they may be protected from cutworms
by placing a band of rather stiff paper or very light cardboard
completely around the stem of each plant. These bands should
fit rather closely around the stems and extend 1 inch below the
ground and about 2 inches above ground. By cutting the paper
in 3-inch squares and rolling around a lead pencil it is easy to
place the bands around the stems of the cabbage plants as they
are being set in the ground.
KALE
Kale belongs to the cabbage group and requires practically the
same soil and cultural conditions as cabbage. In all of the warmer
sections of the country kale can be planted on the top of the ridges
in the fall of the year and will remain in the open ground all winter,
producing a crop during the late winter or early spring.
The usual practice is to throw up ridges about 6 or 8 inches in
height and 3 feet apart; after leveling the ridges a trifle place a
little pinch of seed at intervals of 12 or 14 inches along the tops of
the ridges. Later, when the plants appear, they may be thinned
to 1 or 2 in a place. For spring planting the rows should be made
about 3 feet apart and nearly level. The seed can be sown thinly
in a drill and the plants thinned. The curled Siberian is one of the
most common and best varieties. Kale will not stand any great
amount of heat and is at its best when grown as a late fall or early
spring vegetable.
KALE DISEASES
Control.-Same as for cabbage diseases.


[page 28]

SUBSISTENCE FARM GARDENS 25
INSECTS AFFECTING KALE
The only pest of kale that is economically important is the turnip
aphid. This pest has already been discussed under Cabbage.
SPINACH
Spinach is perhaps the most important of the spring and late-fall
greens, although in northern sections it can be grown during the
entire summer and in southern sections throughout the winter. In
the intermediate sections spinach can be planted as early in the
spring as the ground can be conveniently worked, and also late in
the summer for a fall crop. Spinach will be ready for use in 6
to 10 weeks after it is planted. In the southern sections spinach can
be sown during October and November and will be available for use
the entire winter. The usual method is to throw up beds about 5 or
6 feet in width and plant 5 to 7 rows of spinach on each bed, or in
some cases the seed is sown broadcast on the beds. For spring plant-
ing and where bedding is not essential for drainage, spinach can be
planted on level ground in rows usually spaced from 9 to 12 inches
apart; about 15 seeds are sown to the foot. As a rule this will be
a little too thick for the plants to grow, but the earliest plants can
be thinned out and used, thus making more room for the rest.
Spinach wxill not thrive well on extremely sour soil, and where
the soil is sour lime should be used moderately, about 3 pounds on
each 100 square feet of surface. For spring planting use the variety
known as Longstanding Bloomsdale; for fall planting use the
Virginia Savoy, which is a blight-resistant variety that stands the
wTinters better than the common Savoy.
The secret of having plenty of spinach for use is to make several
seedings beginning just as early as possible in the spring, plant every
2 weeks until midsummer, and then make several fall plantings be-
ginning about the first of September. In the extreme northern part
of the country the plantings can be made at intervals of about every
30 days throughout the spring and summer.
SPINACH DISEASES
Blight.-Spinach blight appears first as a mottling of the young
inner leaves. They later change to a yellow color and are finally
killed. The disease gradually spreads to the outer leaves, which in
turn are changed to yellow. As the disease progresses and before
there is any killing, the leaves curl and wrinkle.
Control.-Plant seed of the Virginia Savoy variety, which resists
the disease. Maintain vigorous plants by thorough cultivation and
give a liberal application of fertilizers. Plant on well-drained soil.
INSECTS AFFECTING SPINACH
Spinach aphid.-The principal insect pest of spinach is the spinach
aphid. The young aphids are pale yellow7ish green with three dark
lines on the back of the abdomen.
Control.-The control measures for this aphid are the same as
for the other aphids already discussed, that is, spraying or dusting
with a strong contact insecticide such as that recommended for
aphids on cabbage.


[page 29]

26 FARMERS' BULLETIN 1746
CARROTS
The carrot is considered one of the best of the early vegetables
from the standpoint of its food and vitamin value. The seed can
be planted as soon as the ground becomes slightly warm. The rows
should be spaced about 18 inches apart and 30 to 40 seeds planted
to each foot of row. The seeds should be covered not more than
half an inch in light loamy soils and a trifle less in the heavy clay
soils. After the plants are up they must be thinned to 6 or 8 to a
foot, but it is necessary to have a much larger number of plants to
begin with, in order that the little seedlings may push through the
surface. It is very important that the plants should be thinned just
as soon as they are large enough to handle.
Carrots require a deep, rich, loose soil containing an abundance of
organic matter so as to hold a reasonable amount of moisture. The
crop requires frequent hoeing and hand weeding, in order to keep
the rows free of grass and other weeds that have a tendency to
smother them. It is good practice to make two plantings during the
early part of the season, about 4 weeks apart, as the second or later
planting usually produces a better grade of carrots for storage
purposes.
The variety known as Chantenay is perhaps the most universally
grown, although there are a number of excellent varieties, such as
Nantes, Danvers Half Long, and Imperator. The fresh carrots
can be used direct from the garden during the entire summer ; then
in the fall as cold weather approaches all that remain may be pulled
and stored in an outdoor pit or packed in moist sand in a cool cellar.
Before the carrots are stored the tops should be cut off about half an
inch above the roots.
OARROT DISEASES
Carrots, as grown in the home garden, are remarkably free from
diseases, and where the plants are properly thinned and cultivated
attention need rarely be paid to carrot diseases.
INSECTS AFFECTING CARROTS
Carrots are comparatively free from insect pests, and in ordinary
gardens they do not require protection from insects. The foliage
of carrots is sometimes damaged by a rather large," highly colored
green and yellow worm, but hand picking these worms when they
appear is usually effective.
BEETS
The beet is another of the garden vegetables or root crops that
is of high food value, and may be planted in rows 18 inches apart,
or about the same as for carrots. Be^ts require a rich, well-drained
soil; however, they do not go as deeply into the soil as carrots and
several other of the root crops. About 1 ounce of seed will be an
abundance for the home garden, and this should be planted rather
sparingly as each of the seed balls may contain 2 or 3 individual
seeds. For that reason about 8 or 10 of the seed balls are planted in
each foot of row ; 100 feet of row will usually provide enough beets
for the average family. The.seeds should be covered about half


[page 30]

SUBSISTENCE FARM GARDENS 27
an inch deep on light soils and a trifle less on heavy soils. The
plants should be thinned to stand at least 3 inches apart, although
they can be left somewhat irregular in the row and in that way
about 6 plants can be left to the foot of row. The young tender
thinnings make excellent greens. Crosby's Egyptian, Detroit Dark
Red, and Eclipse are among the leading varieties for planting in
the home garden. Some gardeners follow the practice of making
two plantings as with carrots. This provides an extra supply for
late summer and for storage.
DISEASES OF BEETS
Garden beets are often injured by cercospora leaf-spot disease
which consists of numerous small round or irregular dead spots with
white centers and purple borders appearing on the leaves. They are
caused by a fungus that attacks both beets and Swiss chard, often
causing the leaves to curl, dry up, and die. The treatment for this
disease is to spray the beets with a 4-6-50 bordeaux mixture when
the first spots are observed, and for complete control repeat the
spraying every 10 days.
INSECTS AFFECTING BEETS
The principal insect pests of beets are blister beetles and flea
beetles.
Blister beetles.-Sometimes beet leaves are stripped, and only the
midribs are left. The damage is caused by beetles almost three-
quarters of an inch long. These beetles may be black, gray, or striped.
Control.-As the name indicates, blister beetles are irritating to
tender skin, and precautions should be taken when hand picking for
control is practiced. The beetles can also be killed by being brushed
into a pail containing water to which a little kerosene has been added.
Flea beetles.-Flea beetles are tiny, active jumping beetles which
eat small circular holes in the leaves.
Control.-The method of control is the same as that for the potato-
flea beetle (p. 15).
SWISS CHARD
Swiss chard is similar to the garden beet in its habit of growth,
except that it grows almost entirely to tops and does not form an
enlarged root. The stems and tender leaves make most excellent
summer greens, being cooked exactly as beet or other greens. Swiss
chard withstands the heat of summer better than spinach, mustard,
and other crops that are usually grown for greens. The variety
known as Lucullus is considered the best. The planting and culture
are exactly the same as for beets, except that the plants should stand
approximately 6 inches apart in the rows. If desired, the seed can
be sown in a seedbed and the plants transplanted. If the seed is
sown where the plants are to remain, the plants may be thinned and
the thinnings used as greens. All but the very hearts of the remain-
ing plants may be cut or pulled frequently for greens and the plants
will put on a new growth. Swiss chard is not easily injured by cold
and may often be used in the fall after frost. The tender leaves and
leaf stems are used, for food.


[page 31]

28 FARMERS' BULLETIN 17 46
DISEASES OF CHARD
Cercospora or leaf spot is often severe on Swiss chard in some
localities. Spraying with bordeaux mixture for its control is imprac-
tical because the spray residue makes the leaves unfit for food. Severe
cutting back together with cultivating, watering, and fertilizing wTill
usually result in new growth free from the leaf spot.
INSECTS AFFECTING SWISS CHARD
Swiss chard is sometimes attacked by blister beetles. These are
easily recognized, as they are long and noticeably slender, with black,
gray, or striped bodies. On Swiss chard they can best be controlled
by hand picking. Foliage that is damaged by blister beetle should
be cut off and discarded and new foliage will form.
PARSNIPS
The parsnip is adapted for growing throughout the northern por-
tion of the United States. Any deep fertile soil will grow parsnips,
but it should be spaded or plowed to a depth of at least a foot and
enriched with fine well-rotted manure and commercial fertilizer. A
shallow, stony, or lumpy soil is inclined to produce rough, prongy
roots. Coarse manure should not come in direct contact with the
roots for the same reason.
Parsnips should be planted in rows 18 to 24 inches apart, and the
seed should not be sown until the ground is fairly warm. Only fresh
parsnip seed should be planted, as the seeds are practically worthless
if kept over until the second year. Hollow Crown and Guernsey are
good varieties. The plants should be thinned to stand about 3 inches
apart in the rows. Cultivation methods are the same as those recom-
mended for beets and carrots.
Parsnips may be dug and stored in a cellar in moist sand, or they
may be left in the ground until they are used. Roots placed in cold
storage gain in quality, and freezing in the ground in the winter also
improves the quality.
Parsnips as grown in the subsistence garden are not subject to any
serious diseases or attacks by insects.
SALSIFY
Salsify, sometimes called oyster plant, can be grown in practically
the same manner as parsnips. The roots may be dug and stored in
the cellar, or they may remain in the ground until wanted for use.
Salsify has no special disease or insect enemies as grown in the
subsistence garden.
BEANS
Beans are among the best foods grown in home gardens. They are
divided into 3 or 4 groups; the snap or bunch beans that are used
fresh from the garden or are canned for winter use, the dry beans,
and lima beans. In addition, there are the so-called black-eyed peas
and crowder peas which are used the same as beans.
There are two types of snap beans, the green podded and the wax
podded, and each of these is divided into the flat-podded and the
round-podded types. Stringless Greenpod is one of the leading


[page 32]

SUBSISTENCE FARM GARDENS 29
round-podded green snap beans. It matures in 50 to 53 days after
planting. Recently, a new round-podded bean has appeared under
the name of Tendergreen. It is claimed that it will mature in about
53 days after planting. Bountiful, a flat-podded green variety,
matures in 48 or 50 days and is a very popular variety for the home
garden. Among the wax-podded bush beans, Pencil Pod Wax, which
matures in about 52 days, is one of the most desirable for the home
garden. Another good wax bean is the Round Pod Kidney Wax.
Among the early pole beans which may be used either as green beans
or as dry beans Kentucky Wonder, or Old Homestead, as it is some-
times called, stands at the head of the list. In the lima bean group
are two classes, the dwarf and the pole. The baby lima or Hen-
derson's Bush is one of the best for southern and central locations,
because it stands the heat of summer so well. However, the beans
of this variety are quite small, and many people prefer to grow the
Fordhook Bush lima, which is sometimes called potato lima and has
extra-large plump beans of very fine quality. Among the pole limas
the King of the Garden is one of the best. The bush limas as a rule
will mature in 75 to 80 days, whereas the pole limas require about
90 days.
Bunch or snap beans should be planted in rows at least 30 inches
apart and the hills 15 to 18 inches apart in the rows, with 3 or
4 plants in each hill. The bush Mma beans require a little more
space than the bunch snap beans ; the rows should, as a rule, be 36
inches apart and the hills 18 to 20 inches apart in the rows. For
the large-growing pole beans like Kentucky Wonder and the pole
lima the hills should be placed about 3 by 4 feet. Three plants of
the Kentucky Wonder may be left in the hill to climb on a single
pole, but not more than two plants of the large-growing pole lima
should be allowed to each pole, and one plant is really better. One
method of planting pole lima beans is to place the hills in the form
of a triangle, and then fasten the three poles together at the top,
Indian-wigwam fashion, and allow one plant to each pole. By this
method the poles do not have to be set in the ground more than
5 or 6 inches, but where the poles stand alone they should be set at
least 15 inches deep in order that they may stand up with the load
of bean vines upon them.
Bunch or snap beans require a fairly rich soil, but the application
of too much fertilizer will often cause them to grow excessive tops
and put on comparatively few beans. With lima beans, especially
the pole lima, there is little danger of getting the soil too rich.
Snap beans may be planted about the time that the last spring
frosts occur. On light and loamy soils the seeds should be planted
about an inch deep, but on heavy clay soils, or where the soil is
fairly wet at the time of planting, the seeds should be covered not
more than one-half an inch. As a matter of fact, if they are scarcely
covered at all they will come up to better advantage. In the case
of lima beans it is customary to take each seed between the thumb
and finger and thrust it eye downward into the soil, and where the
soil is the least dry they should be covered deep enough to reach mois-
ture. In the average home garden it is a good plan to have a few
of each kind of beans in order to give variety and maintain a con-
tinuous supply. One or two plantings of lima beans will be suffi-


[page 33]

30 FARMEKS* BULLETIN 1746
cient, but with the snap beans it is a good plan to make a planting
about every 2 or 3 weeks; however, 50 to 60 feet of row will be an
abundance for planting at any one time. If soil conditions are right
it is easy to get a stand of snap beans. Lima beans are especially
susceptible to cold and wet, and for that reason the seeds should not
be planted until the ground is warm. Under no conditions should
the seeds be put in the ground when it is excessively wet.
BEAN DISEASES
Anthracnose.-Anthracnose may be recognized on the pods by
roundish sunken spots, with dark-brown or black borders and pink
centers. It also produces elongated sunken, dark-red cankers on the
stems and leaf veins, and grows through the pods, causing rusty look-
ing spots on the ripe seed. The organism that causes this disease
lives over winter in the seed and attacks the young seedlings. The
disease is worst during moist, cool weather.
Control,-As anthracnose does not usually occur on bean seed
grown in the States from Colorado west, it is best to buy western-
grown seed if possible. Pull up and burn the first plants showing the
disease. Do not cultivate, walk through, or pick beans when the vines
are wet. To do so will spread the disease and make it worse. Wells
Eed Kidney, White Imperial, and Perry Marrow, all dry shell-bean
types, are resistant to anthracnose and may be grown if dry shell
beans are wanted.
Blight.-Bean blight causes irregular diseased areas on the leaves
which at first are water-soaked, later become brown and brittle, and
usually have pale yellow borders. It attacks the stems, producing
reddish cankers. On the pods slightly raised watery pustules appear,
which later enlarge and become irregular in shape and rusty in color.
The disease is carried in the seed.
Control.-The same as for anthracnose. A few varieties of garden
bush beans are somewhat resistant to the disease : Late Stringless
Green Eefugee, Refugee 1000-1, and Refugee Wax. Procure Avest-
ern-grown seed if possible.
INSECTS ATTACKING BEANS
The principal insect pests attacking beans are the Mexican bean
beetle, the bean leaf hopper, the bean aphid, the seed-corn maggot,
and the bean weevil.
Mexican bean beetle.-In many localities this insect is the worst
pest of beans. The beetles are from one-fourth to one-third inch
long, shaped like a split pea, and from yellow to coppery brown in
color. On the back are 16 small black spots, forming three rows
across the body, as shown in figure 10. In general appearance they
resemble the beneficial lady beetles. The young of the beetles are
yellow grubs with rows of branched spines on their backs. When
full-grown these grubs are about one-third of an inch long. Both
the beetles and larvae eat the bean leaves, and when they are very
abundant they feed on the pods and stems.
Control.-In the home garden these insects can be controlled by
hand picking provided the practice is started early and repeated often
enough. Crushing the yellow egg clusters that may be found on the


[page 34]

SUBSISTENCE FARM GARDENS 31
FIGURE 10.-The Mexican bean beetle : a. Larva ; l, beetle ;
c, pupa ; d, egg mass. About three times natural
size.
under side of the leaves will also prevent a brood of larvae. Derris
or cube root sprays or dusts, applied to the under side of the leaves,
are now recommended
as the most effective ~~
control for this pest.
In general, spraying
is recommended in
preference to dusting,
but good results may
be obtained with the
dust mixture when
applied properly.
These materials can
be prepared accord-
ing to the following formulas, on the basis of derris or cubé root
powder containing 4 percent of rotenone :
Spray :
Derris or cubé root powder 1% ounces or l1^ pounds
Water 3 gallons or 50 gallons
Dust : Derris or cubé root powder 10 ounces or 12% pounds
Finely ground talc, sulphur, tobacco dust, gyp-
sum, or other inert powder, except lime 4% pounds or 87% pounds
If the rotenone content of the derris or cubé root powder is greater
or less than 4 percent, the quantity of the powder should be varied
accordingly when preparing a spray or a dust. When applied at the
dilutions mentioned above, the sprays or dusts containing derris or
cubé do not leave harmful residue on the harvested beans.
Paris green, calcium arsenate, or lead arsenate should not be used
on beans at any time because they will injure the foliage.
Leafhoppers.-These small, greenish-yellow, active insects suck
the juice from bean foliage and prevent normal development.
Control.-Same as for leafhoppers on potatoes, page 15.
Aphids.-Occasionally the terminal shoots of beans are covered
with tiny black aphids (plant lice). These sap the vitality of the
plant and prevent growth.
Control.-With nicotine, as recommended under Potatoes, page 15.
Seed-corn maggot.-Sometimes in wet seasons beans fail to come
up or perish just as they come through the ground. If the seed
is examined closely, small white maggots will be found causing the
damage. The parent flies which lay the eggs that produce these
maggots are attracted to decaying vegetation to deposit their eggs,
and in wet seasons the maggots are able to crawl about and locate
the germinating seed. In wet seasons beans should not be planted
immediately after plowing or spading, especially if much vegetation
has been turned under.
Control,-If possible, allow the vegetation to decay and the soil
to dry before planting the seed. Keep manure out of the seed row.
Planting should be shallow.
Bean weevil.-Seed beans or dry beans for table use are sometimes
bored full of holes and are unfit for seed or food. This damage
begins in the garden, where the parent weevil deposits a tiny egg
inside the pod.


[page 35]

32 FARMERS? BULLETIN 1746
After the egg hatches the larva enters the bean and does not
change to an adult until the beans are stored. When beans are
etored in a warm place the weevils continue to reproduce.
Control.-If the beans are mixed with one-sixth of their weight
of hydrated lime the weevils cannot reproduce in storage. The
Weevils inside the beans can be killed by heating. Spread the
beans in a thin layer in a shallow pan and heat in an oven for 30
minutes. The temperature should be above 120° F. but should not
be allowed to go above 135° F. if the beans are to be used for seed.
The weevil can also be killed by suspending the beans in boiling
water for 1 minute; longer treatment may prevent germination.
The beans should be spread out and dried quickly after removal
from the bath.
SWEET CORN
Sweet corn requires too much space for growing to any extent in
the small garden. It is sometimes possible, however, to grow a small
block of very early sweet corn, then follow it with late cabbage or
with turnips. Where there is sufficient space, about 2 plantings
of an early variety should be made, and 2 or possibly 3 plant-
ings of a later variety. Sweet corn should not be planted until the
ground is reasonably warm. It requires a rich soil, and the hills
should be spaced about 3 by 4 feet, that is, if the rows are 4 feet
apart the hills should be 3 feet apart in the rows. For the dwarf
varieties like Golden Bantam the hills may be placed 3 by 3 feet
with 3 stalks in a hill. The usual custom is to mark off the rows,
then drop about 5 grains of the seed corn in each hill, and cover it
with 1 to 1^ inches of soil. If more than 3 plants appear in a hill
the extra ones are thinned out. Golden Bantam, Golden Cross Ban-
tam, Whipple Early White, Howling Mob, and Mammoth White
Cory are among the leading early varieties; Country Gentleman,
Stowell Evergreen, and Golden Evergreen are among the leading
medium and late varieties.
In planting sweet corn in the garden it should be borne in mind
that the corn will not pollinate and the ears will fail to fill unless
several rows are planted together ; therefore, it is best to plant sweet
corn in a block rather than in the form of a few long rows. Where
the blocks of sweet corn can be placed side by side the first, second,
and subsequent plantings can be located in a continuous section;
in that way good results in the pollinating and filling of the ears
will be obtained.
Corn requires from 3 to 5 cultivations, mainly to keep the ground
free from weeds. Deep stirring of the soil toward the time of the
maturity of the ears is not desirable because the roots of corn run
near the surface and the deep stirring of the soil will break the
feeding roots and check the growth of the corn. For best results
sweet corn should be cooked and on the table within 2 hours after
being pulled, as it loses in sugar content very rapidly after it is
pulled from the stalk. Keeping the corn in a refrigerator at a
temperature below 40° F. after it is pulled will largely prevent
the loss of sugar.


[page 36]

SUBSISTEÍTCE FAEM GARDENS 33
DISEASES OF SWEET CORN
As a rule sweet corn is not seriously troubled by diseases, but in
certain sections there is a disease known as "Stewart's disease." In
these sections resistant varieties are being developed and should be
planted.
Sweet corn is frequently affected by smut on the ears, in the tassels,
and on the stalks. Wherever the smut appears, the affected parts
should be removed and burned immediately to reduce the infectious
material for the following year.
INSECTS AFFECTING SWEET CORN
There are two important insects that attack sweet corn-the Euro-
pean corn borer and the corn earworm.
European corn borer.-The corn borer is a serious pest in sections
of the country where it has become established. There is really
very little that the home gardener can do to control the corn borer
except to cut and de-
stroy all cornstalks
as soon as the ears
have been removed.
This will prevent the
worms that are in the
stalks from maturing
and to some degree
will hold the insect in
check.
Corn earworms.-
This worm works
mainly in the tips of
the ears of corn but
will sometimes eat its
way to the middle or
lower part of the ear.
The eggs are laid on
the young corn silks
by a moth that flies
at night. Dusting the
young corn silks with arsenical poisons may kill some of the worms
when they first hatch, but there is no remedy that is fully effective.
This insect is also known as the tomato fruitworm (fig. 11).
FIGURE 11.-Tomato fruit worm : a. Moth ; ~b, full-grown
fruitworm. (Chittendeu.)
TOMATOES
The tomato is a very important garden crop because of its vitamin
content when eaten raw and its many desirable qualities when cooked
or canned for winter. Plants for early tomatoes should be started
indoors, but those for the main or late crop may be started in a cold-
frame and in some sections in the open ground. For the average
garden 25 to 50 early plants will be enough, but 50 to 100 or more
late plants should be set to furnish plenty of tomatoes for canning.
Two methods are used for growing the early crop. The method
where the plants are set about 2 by 3 feet and trained to stakes has


[page 37]

34 FARMERS' BULLETIN 1746
much to rerommond it, especially where garden space is limited.
As the plants are set, after all danger of frost is past, a strong stake
about 4 feet in height is driven alongside of each plant. As the
plants grow, the side shoots are all removed while still quite small;
and the main stem hearing 5 or G clusters of fruit is tied to the stake
with strips of muslin or soft twine, as shown in figure 12. The other
system consists of planting the tomatoes about 3 by 4 feet apart and
allowing them to branch freely and to grow naturally on the ground.
-Training tomatoes to slakes: A, C'uriiii}; out tlic lying tin; main stem to tue supiiortiiig ide f
stuki
huots or brandies : 7Í,
The late or main crop of tomatoes is usually planted in rows 4 feet
apart, with the plants 3 feet apart in the rows, and allowed to grow
naturally. The green tomatoes that remain on the vines at the close
of the season may often be gathered before they become frosted, and
ripened in a room having considerable moisture in the air and a
temperature of about 55° or 60° F. Some gardeners follow the prac-
tice of pulling the vines with the green tomatoes attached and hang-
ing them in the cellar for the tomatoes tn ripen. Bonny Best, Pritch-
ard. Break CVDay, Marglobe, Stone, and Ponderosa are amone the


[page 38]

SUBSISÏEXCK FAKJI (iATíDEXS 35
varieties most commonly grown in home gardens. The little yellow.
pear-shaped tomatoes are often grown for making tomato butter and
tomato preserves.
DISEASES OV TOMATOES
Tomatoes are subject to attack by 3 or 4 rather serious diseases,
including Septoria or leaf spot, wilt, and blossom-end rot.
Leaf spot.-Leaf spot is caused by a fungus that attacks the leaves
and stems, causing small circular spots with ligbt centers and dark
margins. It starts on the lower leaves and progresses upward, causing
them to curl, dry up.
and fall off, leaving
the stems bare except
at the tips.
Coufrol.-The rem-
edy is to plant only
healthy plants and to
spray thoroughly with
bordeaux mixture, be-
ginning as soon as the
plants are set and re-
peating the treatment
every 10 days.
Wilt.-T íi e wide-
spread and serious
tomato disease known
as wilt is caused by a
fungus that lives in
the soil and is also car-
ried in the seed. It en-
ters the roots from in-
fested soil, grows into
the water vessels, and
produces an upward
curling of the leaves,
followed by gradual yellow
plants (fig. 13).
Control.-To prevent this disease use clean, new soil for growing
the plants; and if the home garden has become infested with wilt,
plant only wilt-resistant varieties such as Pritchard. Marvel, and
Marglobe.
Blossom-end rot.-This rot, while not clearly understood, is known
to cause large, dark, sunken spots on the blossom end of the green
fruits.
Control.-The disease seems to be worse during dry weather, and
watering and frequent cultivation seem to be the only remedies.
Growing the crop on land containing plenty of organic matter to
increase the water-holding capacity of the soil seems to help.
INSECTS THAT ATTACK TOMATOES
Tomatoes are attacked by three insects-tomato hornworms, tomato
fruit worms, and flea beetles.
stam?), showing dead unfrultfulness.
in<i. wilting, and death of the affected


[page 39]

36 FARMEBS' BULLETIN 17 46
Tomato hornworms.-Tomato hornworms are large green worms
that feed on both tomato and tobacco plants (fig. 14). There are
two kinds of hornworms, both very much alike, and in the moth or
adult stage they are known as humming-bird moths. A large horn-
worm can strip a tomato plant of its foliage in 2 or 3 nights, leaving
only the stems.
Control.-Hand picking is the best remedy in the home garden.
The worms are about the color of the tomato vines and are very hard
to see. Therefore, the vines should be examined carefully each day,
after the work of the worms becomes noticeable.
Tomato fruit worm.-The tomato fruit worm, also called the corn
ear worm, is the cause of much trouble to tomato growers, as it eats
into the ripening
fruit and destroys
it.
Control.-This in-
sect may be par-
tially controlled by
spraying with cal-
cium ar sen ate or
paris green, but it is
not safe to spray the
fruits after they be-
come half grown.
All tomatoes from
sprayed vines should
be washed or wiped
thoroughly before
being used.
Flea beetles.-
The potato flea bee-
tle frequently at-
tacks tomatoes and does much damage. It is especially troublesome
on the young plants and is often carried to the garden with the plants.
Control.-Dipping the plants in a solution consisting of 3 ounces
of calcium arsenate in 1 gallon of water before setting them out is
effective. The thorough spraying of the plants with bordeaux mix-
ture is also effective, as this will drive the beetles away.
PEPPERS
The sweet or bullnose pepper is very popular as a garden vege-
table. The seeds should be sown indoors early in the spring, and
the plants set in the garden after all danger of frost is past. Pep-
pers require a very rich soil, and if kept well cultivated, watered,
and free from weeds the plants will continue to produce until frost.
Chinese Giant, Euby King, World Beater, and California Wonder
are among the leading varieties of large sweet pepper. The pimiento
is a medium-sized, thick-walled, sweet pepper that is especially fine
for preserving and is largely used for making the canned pimientos
sold in the stores. There are also numerous varieties of Cayenne
or hot peppers that are used for seasoning and for making chili
and hot pepper sauces for use on meats and in stews.
FIGURE 14.-Tomato hornworm : a, Moth ; 6, hornworm chrysalis. About one-half natural size. (Howard.)


[page 40]

SUBSISTENCE FARM GARDENS 37
DISEASES AND INSECT PESTS
Peppers are subject to a number of diseases, but these are not
as a rule serious in the home garden.
Peppers are practically free from insect injury in the home gar-
den, so much so, in fact, that the subsistence gardener will seldom
encounter any difficulty in this line.
EGGPLANT
Eggplant is a warm-weather crop, and the plants must be started
indoors and planted in the open after the weather has become warm.
The plants must be kept growing vigorously from the very start;
otherwise they will become tough and woody, and when once they
reach that condition they are practically worthless. The plants
should be set about 3 feet apart in each direction, and the soil
should be very rich and well drained. Black Beauty, Early Long
Purple, and New York Spineless are the leading varieties. Eight
or ten plants will usually produce all of the large fruits that an
average family will consume.
DISEASES OF EGGPLANT
Certain leaf and fruit diseases attack eggplant, especially when
the crop is grown on a large scale, but where only a few plants are
grown in the home garden there is not likely to be any serious loss
from diseases.
Control.-Spraying the plants with bordeaux mixture will very
largely prevent the development of diseases.
INSECT ENEMIES
The young plants of eggplant are frequently injured by flea
beetles, and the presence of these insects is manifest by the appear-
ance of small round holes in the leaves.
Control.-Spray or dust both sides of the leaves with calcium
arsenate. As a spray the calcium arsenate may be used in combina-
tion with bordeaux mixture. Bordeaux mixture alone has the effect
of driving the insects away. A dust of 1 part of calcium arsenate
to 8 parts of hydrated lime may be effectively used. Be careful
about the lose af arsenical poisons on the plants after the fruits
begin to form. The common Colorado potato beetle is also trouble-
some on eggplant, but it may be controlled in the same manner as
flea beetles.
SQUASHES AND PUMPKINS
Summer squashes, especially the Summer Crookneck type, should
be included in practically every subsistence garden. Winter squashes,
especially those of the Boston Marrow and Hubbard types, may
often be grown to advantage and stored for winter use. These win-
ter squashes are good for planting in the sections that are too far
north for the growing of sweetpotatoes. All kinds of squashes require
a rich, well-drained soil, and it is a good idea to work a shovelful of
rotted manure and a small handful of commercial fertilizer into
each and every hill. The early or summer squashes may be planted


[page 41]

38 FARMERS' BULLETIN 1746
in hills 4 to 5 feet apart in each direction, but the winter squashes
should be spaced at least 10 feet apart in each direction. About 7 or
8 seeds should be planted in each hill, and after the plants are started
they may be thinned to about 3 in a hill.
The early or summer squashes should be gathered and used while
the skins are still tender so that they can be punctured with the
thumb nail. In the case of the winter squashes they should be al-
lowed to remain on the vines until fully ripened; however, they
should be gathered and stored before there is any actual freezing.
The methods of storage are similar to those for sweetpotatoes ; that
is, they should be placed on shelves or in crates and cured at a tem-
perature between 80° and 85° F. for several days, then be kept at a
temperature around 55° or 60°. A shelf in the furnace room of
the home is often a good place to store the winter supply of squashes.
In handling them when they are to be stored it is important that
they be handled carefully and that the skin does not become punc-
tured. They should be gathered with a short piece of the stem
attached to them.
Pumpkins may be planted in the corn patch or on ground where
early crops have been removed. Their culture is the same as for
squashes except that they make a rather long vine growth and need
more room.
The Connecticut cheese or pie pumpkin is one of the best varieties
for growing in the home garden.
Pumpkins should be stored in exactly the same manner as winter
squashes.
DISEASES OF SQUASHES AND PUMPKINS
Squashes and pumpkins are subject to a mildewing of the leaves
and certain leaf spot diseases, but none of these prove very serious
in the home garden, and for that reason the subsistence gardener need
not consider them unless more serious outbreaks than normal should
occur.
Control.-Spraying the foliage and stems with bordeaux mixture
will often largely prevent the occurrence of any of these diseases.
INSECTS AFFECTING SQUASHES AND PUMPKINS
The striped cucumber beetle very frequently attacks the young
seedling squashes and pumpkins just as they emerge from the
ground. Dusting the plants with a mixture of 1 part calcium arsen-
ate and 5 or 6 parts hydrated lime is usually effective in controlling
these insects. When only a few hills are being grown in the home
garden it is often possible to cover the hills with small pieces of
cheesecloth until the plants are well established and less liable to
attack by the striped cucumber beetle. The cheesecloth should be
supported on arches made of wires or barrel hoops set over the
plants, the edges of the cheesecloth being weighted down with soil.
Another method is to start the hills of early squashes in quart
berry boxes of soil in the hotbed or coldframe. By the time the
plants can be set in the open they will be past the stage of most se-
rious attack by the striped cucumber beetle.
Squashes and pumpkins are also attacked by aphids which work
on the underside of the leaves. Spraying or dusting the plants
with nicotine will control these insects.


[page 42]

SUBSISTENCE FARM GARDENS 39
Squashes are frequently killed by the squash vine borer which
enters the stem at or near the surface of the ground and bores tunnels
in the squash vines as shown in figure 15. When the borers attack
the squash vines it is almost impossible to kill them without killing
the plants. The borers may sometimes be cut out of squash vines
by slitting the stems of the vines lengthwise. Afterwards, these por-
tions of the vines should be covered with soil to help the plant grow
extra roots. MELONS
Muskmelons and watermelons are not recommended for growing
in subsistence gardens except under the most favorable conditions
and where there is plenty of land available without restricting the
planting of more important food crops. The culture of muskmelons
is practically the same as that for squashes and pumpkins. Musk-
melons may be
grown on any
good garden soil,
but watermelons
are at their best
when grown on a
warm, sandy loam.
There are a great
many varieties of
musKmelons, but
those of the Net-
ted Gem type are
considered best in
most localities.
Throughout Ohio
and Indiana, the
variety known as
Tip Top is largely
grown. In Michi-
gan Hearts of Gold is ordinarily grown. Owing to the uncertainty
of producing a good quality of muskmelon in the home garden, sub-
sistence gardeners should go rather slowly in the planting of this
crop at least until they determine how the crop should be grown.
Watermelons are even less desirable for planting in the subsistence
garden because they require a large amount of space and a particular
type of soil.
DISEASES OF MELONS
Three important diseases-anthracnose, downy mildew, and blight-■
all ordinarily called " blight " or " leaf spot ", may attack the musk-
melon when weather conditions are favorable, frequently resulting
in heavy losses. All three diseases are caused by fungi. They often
develop and spread rapidly in moist, warm weather and ^re character-
ized by brownish, more or less rounded or angular spots (fig. 16),
which enlarge and soon cause the leaves to turn yellow, curl, dry up,
and die. Watermelons are also subject to leaf diseases but not to the
same extent as muskmelons.
Control.-Spraying the foliage thoroughly with bordeaux mixture
is fairly effective in preventing the development of these leaf diseases.
FIGURE 15.-Squash borer : a, Moth with wings spread ; h, moth at rest ; o, egg on section of vine ; A, caterpillar or grub in squash vine ; e, chrysalis ; f, chrysalis cell from ground. Enlarged one-third. (Chittenden.)


[page 43]

40 FAEMEKS' BULLETIN 1746
The spraying should bepin early or just as soon as the first leaves are
formed and be repeated at intervals of every Aveek or 10 days until
the crop is all gathered.
INSECTS AFFECTING MELOKS
The youiifi seedling melon plants are subject to attack by the
striped cucumber beetle the same as squashes, and the control meas-
ures are also the same.
Aphids or plant lice are especially troublesome on muskmelons (fig.
17) and to a considerable degree on watermelons. The control is the
same as for squashes.
The squash vine
borer will occasion-
ally attack muskmel-
ons, but the danger of
loss is not as great as
with squashes and
pumpkins,
CUCUMBERS
Cucumbers, while
not of pjreat actual
food value, should
find a place in most
subsistence gardens.
They add variety and
freshness to salads al-
though there are cer-
tain people who can-
not safely eat them.
Cucumbers are also
highly desirable for
the making of pickles
and relishes. The cul-
ture of cucumbers is
the same as that for
squashes and melons.
White Spine is one of the leading varieties. Where cucumbers
are grown mainly for pickles the Boston Pickling variety should
be planted.
DISEASES OF CUCUMBERS
The diseases of cucumbers are practically the same as those of
muskmelons (see p. 39).
INSECTS ATTACKING CUCUMBESiS
The striped cucumber beetle and the aphids or plant lice are the
most troublesome insects on cucumbers. Cucumbers are sometimes
killed by the squash vine borer. Splitting the stems and removing
the grubs is the best known remedy.
FIóURE 10.-Muskmclon leaf spot.


[page 44]

SUBSISTENCE FARM GASDENS 41
SWEETPOTATOES
In the warmer sections of the territory to which this bulletin
applies, especially along the Atlantic coast, and in Indiana, Illinois,
Iowa, and Missouri, the sweetpotato is an important home-garden
crop. While sweetpotatoes do not entirely take the place of potatoes
they should be included in the garden plan wherever soil and climatic
conditions are suit-
able for growing
them. They require
a rather light,
warm, sandy soil,
and while it is
desirable to have
plenty of decayed
manure or organic
matter in the soil
the sweetpotato will
respond very readily
to the application
of commercial ferti-
lizers.
The plants with
which to start the
crop must either be
grown from seed po-
tatoes in a hotbed
or they may be pur-
chased from south-
ern plant growers.
The plants are usu-
ally set on ridges,
the ridges being
made 34 to 40 inches
apart and about 8
inches in height but
rather broad at the
base.
About an 8-quart
pailful of fertilizer
that is rather high
in potash content
may be sown to each
100 feet of row, be-
ing applied before the ridges are made up. The ridges should be
made at least 3 or 4 days before the plants are set, but in case the
ridges are not made until the time of setting the plants the fertilizer
should be most thoroughly mixed with the soil before making the
ridges. The plants should be set about 14 inches apart on the ridges
and about a pint of water should be used around the roots of each
plant as it is being set.
Sweetpotato plants should not be set in the open until all danger
of frost is past and the ground is fairly warm. Yellow Jersey and
FIGURE 17.-Melon leaves curled by the melon aphid. (Chittenden.)


[page 45]

42 FARMERS' BULLETIN 17 46
Bigstem Jersey are two of the leading varieties of the dry-fleshed
type. Nancy Hall and Porto Eico are most frequently planted of
the moist types of sweetpotatoes.
In the fall when frost kills the sweetpotato vines the potatoes
should be carefully lifted from the soil with a spading fork or with
some tool that will not bruise or damage them, and they should then
be stored in a warm, well-ventilated place, preferably in crates or
open slat baskets and given a curing period of about 10 days or 2
weeks at a temperature somewhere in the neighborhood of 85° F.
This curing process dries out the potatoes and largely prevents the
development of rots and other diseases. After the curing period the
potatoes should be kept at a temperature of about 55°, but always
dry and with plenty of ventilation.
Where only a few crates of sweetpotatoes are to be stored they can
often be kept to advantage on a shelf or a table near the furnace in
a dry basement, or near a heater stove in which a slow fire is kept
during cold weather.
DISEASES OF SWEETPOTATOES
Sweetpotatoes are subject to a number of diseases, but only 2 or 3
are troublesome in the home garden. Black rot and scurf are com-
mon on all varieties and stem rot may be prevalent on the Jersey
types, and on the Porto Rico and Nancy Hall. When the plants
become diseased in the field, very little can be done to save them.
Scurf, sometimes called soil stain, discolors the skin of the potato,
but it does not affect the eating qualities. There are also a number
of serious disease troubles in storage.
Most of the diseases of sweetpotatoes in the garden and in storage
can be controlled if care is taken to set only clean plants. If the
potatoes are to be stored they should be carefully handled during
the operation of digging and storing in order not to bruise and in-
jure the skin. Proper curing after the potatoes are placed in storage
will greatly reduce the chances of loss from storage diseases.
INSECTS ATTACKING SWEETTPOTATOES
In the more northern sections where sweetpotatoes may be grown
in subsistence gardens there are no very serious insect pests to be
reckoned with. In the South the sweetpotato weevil is a trouble-
some pest. Grasshoppers frequently damage the sweetpotato vines,
but these can be controlled by the distribution of poisoned bran mash
as described on page 10.
FRUITS FOR THE SUBSISTENCE GARDENS
Planting fruit of any kind on the subsistence homestead should
be secondary to the establishment of the vegetable garden, but certain
of the small fruits like strawberries, raspberries, blackberries, and
grapes come into bearing comparatively quickly, and whenever the
conditions are favorable these fruits should be planted as early in the
program as possible. It is doubtful, however, if those who are un-
dertaking subsistence farming should rush into the planting of tree
fruits, and perhaps in the long run better results will be obtained by
delaying the planting of fruit trees until time has been given to
study the situation, to carefully select the location for the various
trees, and to determine the best varieties to plant.


[page 46]

SUBSISTENCE FARM GARDENS 43
Another angle to the growing of fruit for home use is the problem
of its protection from diseases and insects. There was a time when
a fair grade of fruit could be grown without spraying or dusting,
but that time has long since passed, and to be successful in the pro-
duction of good fruit the grower must now follow a definite schedule
of spraying or dusting in order to keep his trees free from insects
and diseases.
It has been suggested that certain fruit trees might very properly
be planted around the home, where they will serve both for shade
and for the production of fruit to be used in the home. This use
of fruit trees should, however, be very carefully studied before any
planting is done, as overripe or decaying fruit has a tendency to
attract flies and bees. Decaying fruit is also objectionable from a
sanitary standpoint. As a general rule, tree fruits should be planted
by themselves and where it will be most economical to give them
the proper care, especially as regards spraying or dusting. The
following pages contain brief instructions for the benefit of those
who may desire to make an early start in the growing of fruits for
home use. STRAWBERRIES
Strawberries are adapted for growing in practically every part of
the country, and come into bearing within a comparatively short
time after they are planted. Plants that are set in the spring or
early summer will give an abundant crop the following year. For
the average family 100 to 150 plants will be sufficient at the begin-
ning. These should be set in rows 3 or 3% feet apart and 18 to 24
inches apart in the rows.
There are two systems of growing strawberries for home use-the
hill system and the matted-row system. According to the hill sys-
tem the original plants are set somewhat closer, and very few new
plants are allowed to form, the plants being kept in distinct hills;
according to the matted-row system, a large number of plants are
allowed to form, and these are kept trained in the form of a matted
row 12 to 18 inches in width, the plants being thinned or spaced so
as to stand from 6 to 8 inches apart in the row.
In setting strawberry plants extreme care must be taken that
they are not placed so deep that the hearts or crowns will be filled
with soil during rains; on the other hand they should not be set so
shallow that any part of the roots will be exposed above ground. In
other words, they should be set at the same level that they grew in
the original bed.
Strawberries require a moderately rich soil, especially one that is
reasonably free from grass and weeds. They can be grown on all
types of soils except those that are wet or extremely sour. Where
there is any question about drainage the plants should be set on a
slight ridge or bed. Where the plants are set during the early
spring, the blossom stems should all be clipped off and no fruit
allowed to set the first season.
There are many good varieties of strawberries, but certain of them
are better adapted than others for the different sections of the coun-
try. The Premier, or Howard 17 as it is properly called, is perhaps
the most universally grown throughout the northeastern United
States. Recently a number of new varieties have been introduced,
prominent among these being the Dorsett and Fairfax, especially for


[page 47]

44 FARMEES' BULLETIN 17 46
the northeastern section, and the Blakemore for the southern sections
north of Florida. The season for ripe strawberries can be very
materially extended by planting early, medium, and late varieties.
Gardeners are advised to consult their local county agricultural
agents as to the best varieties to plant in their respective sections.
While strawberry plants will produce their best crop the season
following the setting of the plants, the bed may be cleaned out after
the first fruiting season and carried over for another year. After
the second year, however, it usually pays to start a new bed and
plow under the old one. Where the bed becomes grassy or extremely
weedy, it is difficult to renovate and carry it over. Many growers
follow the practice of setting a small bed each year and destroying
the old bed after it produces its second year's crop.
DISEASES AND INSECT ENEMIES
The diseases and insects of strawberries as encountered in the
home garden are not especially important ; the main point is to select
good vigorous varieties that are adapted to each particular region.
Strawberries are sometimes affected by certain leaf-spot diseases,
but, as a rule, these troubles can be sufficiently overcome by good
cultivation. The large white grub of the May beetle often does
considerable harm; for that reason strawberries should not be
planted on land where a heavy sod has been turned under, nor
should fresh cow manure be used as a fertilizer.
RASPBERRIES
Raspberries are not recommended for extensive planting in the
Southern States, and only the most hardy varieties are adapted for
growing in the colder parts of the Northeastern and North Central
States. This practically limits the growing of raspberries in home
gardens to the North Central States and the parts of the Northeastern
States where the temperature does not ordinarily go lower than 15°
below zero. In northern Minnesota and the Dakotas, raspberries are
frequently grown by laying down the canes in the fall and covering
them with earth, and then uncovering them in the spring, but the
winters are too severe in that section for growing raspberries by the
ordinary methods.
One hundred hills or plants of raspberries will be an abundance for
growing in the average home garden, and the grower has a choice
among the black, purple, and red varieties. Among the black va-
rieties most commonly grown in home gardens are the Cumberland,
Plum Farmer, and Gregg; Cardinal, Columbian, and Eoyal Purple
are leading purple varieties; and Cuthbert, Latham, Van Fleet, and
Ranere (St. Regis) are among the best red varieties. The Van
Fleet will grow well to the southward, while the Ranere is somewhat
of an everbearer, producing an early summer crop which is sometimes
followed by a fair crop in the late summer and fall. The Latham is
a late berry of Minnesota origin and one of the most hardy of all
the raspberry varieties.
Raspberries require a well-drained, rich soil with plenty of humus
to prevent drying-out. In preparing the soil for planting it is a
good plan to open a trench and work manure and a little bone meal
or mixed fertilizer into the soil. The red varieties of raspberries are
propagated by shoots that come up from underground roots. These


[page 48]

SUBSISTENCE FARM GARDENS 45
are lifted and reset either in the fall or early in the spring before the
buds start. The black varieties are started from tip layers where
the tips of the eanes bend over and touch the ground, take root, and
start new plants. These new plants are lifted with a little soil
around their roots and planted in a new location. New canes are
formed each season and bear the crop of the following season, after
which the old canes die and should be removed. The fall crop of the
Eanere variety is borne on the tips of the new canes ; then these same
canes throw out branches and bear the crop the following season.
Kaspberries should be given plenty of space; the rows should be
4 to 5 feet apart and the plants 3 feet apart in the rows. Two years
are required after planting before any considerable crop will be
borne; if the bed is kept clean and the plants well worked and fer-
tilized, the plants should last for years. One of the real problems is
to get plants that are free from crown gall and other root diseases.
If the plants are purchased from a nursery the gardener should insist
that they be guaranteed to be free from these diseases. Spraying the
plants each winter with lime-sulphur solution will very largely con-
trol scale insects and bark diseases, but it is very essential that good
plants be secured to start with. After a start is once made it is easy
to produce all the plants required for replacements and new plantings.
Easpberry canes should be tied to stakes or wires so as to be held
off the ground, especially during the fruiting period. The usual
method of supporting the canes is to stretch wires on light posts about
30 inches aboveground and tie the canes to them.
Mulching the raspberry plants with coarse manure will aid greatly
in holding soil moisture and at the same time help to keep down
weeds. BLACKBERRIES
Blackberries grow naturally throughout the greater part of the
Northeastern States, and in many sections the wild varieties give fair
results. However, it is better to plant 40 or 50 hills of one or more
of the cultivated varieties. Blackberries require a deep, rich soil con-
taining plenty of organic matter to hold moisture. In case the soil
is poor and thin, some form of organic matter such as manure or de-
caying vegetable matter should be worked into it before the berries are
planted. Blackberry plants should be set as earlv in the spring as the
land can be worked, the plants used consisting or rooted shoots of the
previous year's growth. They should be set as deep as, or perhaps just
a little deeper than, they stood in the original patch or nursery.
Plants set during the spring will produce a moderate crop the follow-
ing spring and a good crop the second or third spring after setting.
Blackberry plants should be given 6 to 8 feet between rows with the
hills d1/2 or 4 feet apart in the rows. One method of planting black-
berries is to place the rows about 8 feet apart ; then grow vegetables
such as cabbage or potatoes in the spaces between the blackberry rows.
After 2 or 3 years, if the plants make a good growth, they will require
practically all of the space. Blackberries require thinning because if
all of the suckers are allowed to grow by the end of the second or third
year the patch would be a dense thicket of blackberry canes just as
they grow in the wild.
Some form of support is desirable; in fact, the plants should be
either staked and tied, or wires should be stretched on posts and the
canes tied to them.


[page 49]

46 FARMERS' BULLETIN 1746
Like raspberries, blackberries are greatly improved by mulching
with straw or some coarse material that will help to conserve the
moisture.
Blowers, Brainerd, Early Harvest, Eldorado, Lawton, and Snyder
are among the leading varieties; however, because of the different
behavior of the several varieties in various sections of the country it
is always well to consult a local grower regarding the selection of
varieties for any particular locality.
The cultivation of blackberries is not difficult and consists mainly
of keeping the patch free from weeds and grass and heading back the
new canes when they reach a height of 3 or 3% feet in order to make
them branch. The old canes should also be removed after they have
produced their crop of fruit.
DEWBERRIES
Dewberries are grown practically the same as blackberries; how-
ever, they are not as hardy as blackberries, and only the most rugged
varieties will stand the northern winters. Where blackberries are
grown for home use it is scarcely worth while to grow dewberries in
addition.
The Lucretia and Young dewberries are the main varieties for the
South, but the former can be grown well to the northward if the canes
are protected by covering during the winter. Unlike the canes of
the blackberry, those of the dewberry are trailing, and it is necessary
to tie them to stakes or to horizontal wires.
DISEASES AND INSECT PESTS OF RASPBERRIES, KLACKBERRIESi, AND DEWBERRIES
Raspberries, blackberries, and dewberries frequently do very well
without treatment for the control of diseases and insect pests.
Anthracnose.^-If the disease known as anthracnose is serious,
blackberries and dewberries may be sprayed with bordeaux mix-
ture just as the buds are breaking, followed by two more applica-
tions at intervals of 2 weeks. For the control of anthracnose rasp-
berries may be sprayed with bordeaux mixture once only, just as
the leaves begin to show green. Additional applications are apt to
cause serious injury.
Raspberry mosaic.-Raspberry mosaic makes the leaves crinkly and
off color. Affected plants become nonproductive and should be
promptly removed to save the others, as the disease is infectious.
Plant only disease-free stock.
Rust.-An orange-colored rust attacks and destroys raspberry,
blackberry, and dewberry bushes. Infected bushes should be re-
moved at once. Insist upon getting disease-free nursery stock.
As a rule insects do not trouble raspberries, blackberries, and
dewberries. GRAPES
Grapes of one type or another can be grown in practically every
section of the country. For planting in the South the Thomas and
Scuppernong varieties are recommended, whereas in the northeast-
ern section the American bunch grapes such as Concord, Niagara,
Moore Early, and 1 or 2 others are recommended. The usual method
of propagating grapes is by means of cuttings, and 1-year plants are
as a rule used for planting. There are several methods of training


[page 50]

SUBSISTENCE FARM GAKDENS 47
grapes-on trellises, on arbors, and on posts. The two-wire trellis
with the wires stapled to posts is undoubtedly best where fruit produc-
tion is the primary object. Grape arbors serve a dual purpose of
furnishing shade, and, under favorable conditions, growing large
quantities of grapes. The danger of loss from diseases, however, is
somewhat greater when the vines are trained on arbors than when
they are on trellises.
One row of grapevines across the back of the lot or along one
side of the garden is generally suificient to supply all the grapes
needed by the average family. This will require 8 or 10 vines,
which should be planted fully 12 feet apart.
Grapes require a reasonably rich, well-drained soil, and they
grow well when conditions are right for them. Manure and ferti-
lizer may be used to enrich the soil in the beginning; then top-
dressings of fertilizers and mulches of straw or some other material
will aid in keeping the vines in a vigorous growing condition.
Grapevines send their roots to considerable distances. They draw
rather heavily upon
M£\ _S ^ ^ , - the soil moisture
and plant food and,
if planted along one
side of the garden,
are likely to serious-
ly affect the crops of
garden vegetables.
Grapevines grown
on good land may
produce a few
bunches of grapes
the second year af-
ter planting, but as
a rule no consider-
able crop is obtained
until the third or
fourth year. Care-
ful and systematic
pruning of the
vines is the secret
of success in grape
culture. Pruning
should be done dur-
ing the early winter
. and in case of the
American or bunch grapes, such as Concord, Niagara, Moore Early,
and Delaware, the shoots that grew the previous year should be cut
back so as to leave about three good buds on each. These buds in
turn will produce new shoots on which three or four bunches of
grapes will be borne the following season. If too many buds are left
on the vines the new growth will be weak and the bunches small.
On a 3-year-old vine not more than 20 buds of last year's growth
should be allowed to remain; on older vines 20 to 40 buds may be
left, the number depending upon the vigor and strength of the vine.
One principle that should be observed in the pruning of bunch
FIGURE 18.-Diagram of a grapevine before pruning, showing
the different parts and illustrating the 4-arm system of
training: A, Arms or ramifications of the branches, usu-
ally of wood 2 or more years old ; B, branches which are
of mature wood, being several years old ; C, canes, called
shoots when green and canes when mature ; L. laterals,
the secondary shoots of a cane; #, suckers, the shoots
starting below the ground from the main body; T, trunk,
the stem or main body of the vine ; TF.#., water sprouts,
the shoots which start above the ground from wood older
than 1 year ; 1, 2, S, if, 2-.vear-old arms.


[page 51]

48 FARMERS' BULLETIN 17 46
grapes is to keep the bearing wood as near to the main stem of the
vine as possible. By the usual method of training on wire trellises
about 4 side branches, 2 in each direction, are allowed to remain.
These in turn may form three or four lateral branches on which the
crop is borne. The proper method of pruning a grapevine by the
4-arm system is shown in figures 18 and 19.
Where the 2-wire-trellis method of training is used the wires are
stretched on posts, the first wire about 28 inches from the ground and
the second wire at a height of about 4 feet. The vines are trained
so that there will be side branches at the proper height to tie to
these wires. This gives an ideal arrangement from the standpoint
of spraying and picking the fruit. If these lateral branches even-
tually become too long and too old to produce good crops, new lat-
eral branches may of tin be started from the main trunk of the vine
and the old branches removed. This provides for a renewal of the
bearing portions of the vines. In all cases the vines should be se-
curely tied to the wires. A certain amount of pinching back and
thinning out of the
weak shoots is permis- -^¡a ^-j
sible during the grow- ^ **'*
inff season.
DISEASES AND
PESTS
The principal dis-
eases and insect pests
of the grape, such as
black rot, flea beetle,
berry moth, etc., can
be controlled by
spraying with bor-
deaux mixture to each
5 gallons of which 3
level tablespoonfuls
of powdered arsenate
of lead is added.
The first spraying
should be applied
when the young
shoots have just started in the spring and are about 4 inches long,
the second just before the blossoms open, the third just after the
blossoms have fallen, and the fourth about a week later; for this
application a tablespoonful of nicotine sulphate should be added to
each 5 gallons of the spray to control plant lice.
Since these sprays are poisonous, the arsenate of lead and the
nicotine should be omitted from applications made after the grapes
become as large as garden peas, and all sprayed fruit should be
thoroughly washed before it is eaten or offered for sale.
Covering the bunches of grapes with paper bags soon after the
blooming period is an effective means of protecting them from most
diseases and insect pests without the subsequent use of sprays.
FIGURE 19.-A vine primed according to the 4-arm system :
Cs Canes, called shoots when green and canes when
mature ; Sv., spurs, canes cut back to 1 to 4 eyes ;
T, trunk, tne stem or main body of the Vine ; a, b, c3 d,
arms succeeding those shown at their 2-year-old stage in
figure 18 at 1, 23 3, 4-


[page 52]

SUBSISTENCE FARM GARDENS 49
Small flying insects known as leaf hoppers frequently do great
damage to grapevines. In most sections the grape leafhoppers may
be controlled by the use of three-eighths of a pint of nicotine sulphate
(40-percent nicotine) to 50 gallons of soapy water or bordeaux mix-
ture. For small quantities, use three-fourths of a teaspoonful of
nicotine sulphate per gallon of spray. The first application should
be made when the wingless hoppers or nymphs of the first brood are
present in large numbers (in the North this will be late in June or
early in July), as can be determined by examination.
APPLES
Apples should not be planted on the subsistence farm unless con-
ditions for their growth are reasonably good. Apples require a
rather deep and fairly rich, well-drained soil, and they should be
planted only on high ground where the air arainage is such that
the blossoms will not be killed by late spring frosts. Apples require
special spraying or dusting in order to protect the fruit and foliage
from insects and diseases. Considering allJ:hese points, it is doubt-
ful if a very large percentage of those engaging in subsistence farm-
ing will be justified in planting apple trees. Under reasonably favor-
able conditions, however, it may be desirable to plant a few trees,
including 1 or 2 early varieties or 1 or 2 late summer and fall va-
rieties, and about 2 or 3 late or winter varieties. It should be borne
in mind that varieties differ with location, and in planting apples
for home use the local growers who have had experience should al-
ways be consulted as to the best varieties. The county agent can
usually give advice as to the best varieties to plant in a given locality.
It is seldom satisfactory to plant one apple tree with the idea of
getting any considerable amount of fruit, unless nearby neighbors
have apples on their places from which the bees may carry pollen to
fertilize the apple blossoms. Very few varieties set fruit in abun-
dance from their own pollen. Grimes Golden is self-fertile to a high
degree, and in addition, this variety is extensively used as a pollinizer
for other varieties. Where a single apple tree is grown, a crop of
fruit may often be procured by cutting a few branches bearing the
blossoms from some other apple tree known to be a good pollinizer,
such as Grimes Golden, placing them in a pail or jar of water, and
hanging them in the isolated tree where the bees may visit the
blossoms and carry the pollen to the blossoms on the tree.
Apple trees eventually grow to considerable size and should be
spaced at least 30 and preferably 35 to 40 feet apart. Well-grown,
2-year-old nursery trees are to be preferred for planting on subsist-
ence farms. In planting apple trees, or any kind of a tree for that
matter, it is important that the roots be protected from drying out
during handling. Set the tree at the same depth or perhaps an
inch deeper than it grew in the nursery, and be sure that fine, moist
soil is well packed around the roots and that no air spaces are left.
Fill the holes completely and tramp the soil, mounding it up a trifle
to prevent the tree from being whipped about by winds. After the
tree becomes established, the ground about it should be leveled and
cultivation practiced.
The shape of an apple tree depends to some extent on the pruning
it receives during the first 3 or 4 years after it is set out. It is dur-


[page 53]

50 FARMERS' BULLETIN 1746
ing this period that the main or scaffold branches arc established and
the entire crown of the tree formed. In general, an apple tree
shonld be pruned with more or less of an open head so that the
sunshine may reach the inside of the branches.
For home fruit production, especially where the trees are to be
used for shade, or where crops are to be grown in the spaces between
the trees during the first 3 or 4 years, it is best to train the trees
fairly high above the ground but not so high as to make spraying
and picking the fruit difficult. Figure 20 shows a desirable form
for a mature apple tree.
i : >
-.. :, -'"ai Mil iiÉiTfrliiPKir iÄ^IIL
^L sitia ■ *. . v ; » ■ „■ - ■ «* ^ .
■" ^-^v^^-^l^l i
i ".K -■:' ' ■ ^'-' ' :> '' '" " ""
"■ -'fr^^
; -■ ■
'♦',,. ; . .
' '' ; ; ■ .,--:
P^^^£^H|
'' . ¿- '■' f***" " % ' ' '
FIGURE 20.-A desirable form for a mature apple tree, such as may lie developed by judicious pruning. Tills tree is about 30 years old.
PEARS
Pears are somewhat better adapted for growing in the subsistence
garden than are apples, because they require less space and come
into bearing at an earlier age. Pears do not require as rich a soil
as apples or peaches, in fact, if they are planted on rich soil or
given applications of fertilizers and clean culture they are very
likely to be attacked by blight. The varieties of pears to be planted
in the subsistence garden will depend upon locality, but the Bartlett,
Seckel, and Angouleme are among those most commonly planted
in northern sections. The Bartlett is undoubtedly the choicest mar-
ket and home variety, but it is extremely susceptible to blight. The
Kieffer variety is less susceptible to blight, and while the fruit is of
inferior eating quality to that of the Bartlett it is a heavy bearer
and the fruit is of fair quality for canning and preserving. One


[page 54]

SUBSISTENCE FARM GARDENS 51
or two trees of the Kieffer variety will generally be sufficient to fur-
nish all of this class of fruit required by the average family. The
quality of Kieffer pears is greatly improved by picking them care-
fully to avoid bruising and then storing at a temperature of 60° F.
until they soften slightly.
Pear trees may be spaced 20 to 25 feet apart and should be located
on ground that is not used for the growing of any cultivated crop.
DISEASES AND INSflCT PESTS OF APPLES AND PEAES
Most diseases and insect pests of the apple and pear, such as scab,
rot, the various leaf spots, San Jose scale, codling moth or apple
worm, and caterpillars, can be largely controlled by spraying. Dusts
may be used instead of sprays in all applications except for the dor-
mant or winter sprays, and while not generally so effective during
the growing season as the sprays, they are more easily and rapidly
applied. The following schedule will give control of the more im-
portant diseases and insect pests:
1. Lime-sulphur, 1 pint to 1 gallon of water or 3-percent oil emulsion, to be
applied before growth begins in the spring.
2. Lime-sulphur, 1 pint, and arsenate of lead, 15 rounded teaspoonfuls in 5
gallons of water, or 3 rounded teaspoonfuls per gallon, or a dust composed of
dusting sulphur, 9 parts, and arsenate of lead, 1 part by weight, to be applied
(a) just before the blossoms open, (&) just after the petals have fallen, (c)
3 to 4 weeks later, and (d) 3 weeks later.
It must be remembered that, since these sprays and dusts are
Eoisonous, all fruits treated with them should be thoroughly washed
öfore being eaten or offered for sale. The same sprays may be used
on sour cherries at the same time, but not on peaches, plums, and
sweet cherries. The sprays recommended on page 53 for peaches and
plums may also be used safely on apples, pears, cherries, and apricots ;
they will not control apple and pear pests as well as the lime-sulphur
and oil sprays, but if one set of sprays is desired for all these fruits,
the set recommended for peaches and plums should be used. All
rotten, wormy, and scabby fruit should be removed from the tree
or from the ground and destroyed.
Cankers.-Cankers or dead areas in the bark should be carefully
removed with a knife or carpenter's gouge, in the same way that the
cankers caused by pear blight are removed.
Blight of apples and pears.-Apples and pears are subject to an
infectious disease which causes blossoms and twigs to turn black and
die in the spring, and makes dead areas in the bark of large limbs and
trunks. Infected twigs should be removed as soon as they show any
infection ; they should be cut about 6 inches below the infected areas,
the dead areas of bark should be removed with a knife or carpenter's
gouge, the cut extending well back into living bark. The tools
should be sterilized after each cut by being swabbed with a 1 to 1,000
solution of corrosive sublimate obtainable at any drug store. Large
wounds should be painted over with ordinary house paint or with
coal tar thinned with creosote.
Cedar rust of apple.-Orange-colored spots on the leaves and fruits
of the apple are produced by a fungus that must live during part of
its life on the red cedar. Removing the cedar trees in the vicinity of
the orchard is the only practical remedy, but this is frequently not
practical for small plantings.


[page 55]

52 FARMEKS' BULLKTIX 1746
PEACHES
Peaches are among the most uncertain of the tree fruits that may
be planted in the subsistence garden. The trees come into bearing
the third or fourth year after planting. They seldom live more
than 20 years, and crop failures due to tbe killing of the blossoms
by frost are of very common occurrence. Commercial peach growers
consider that if they can secure a crop 3 years out of 5 they are doing
very well.
FIGUKB 21.-A well-formed, 6-ycar-old peach tree which has had systematic pruning.
Among the varieties of peaches that may be planted in many
sections in the subsistence garden are Belle and Elberta. although
numerous other varieties are grown in special localities. The grower
is advised to seek the advice of some experienced fruit grower before
making up his list of varieties.
Peach trees should be planted 16 to 20 feet apart and given clean,
careful cultivation throughout their life period. The trees require
pruning every season in order to prevent the formation of too
many buds, which result in a thick growth and the production of
small fruit. This pruning usually takes the form of thinning out
the branches and opening up the head of the tree so as to admit
plenty of sunlight and at the same time prevent the tree from becom-
ing too tall for convenience in thinning and picking the fruit. Wher-
ever there is a heavy set of fruit, the fruit should be thinned so that


[page 56]

SUBSISTENCE FARM GARDENS 53
the individual fruits will be 4 to 6 inches apart on the branches. A
good type of peach tree is shown in figure 21.
PLUMS
Plums are well adapted for growing on the subsistence farm,
especially in the poultry yard and in out-of-the-way places where
they will not seriously interfere with other crops.
Lombard, Reine Claude (Green Gage), German Prune, Shropshire
(Damson), Abundance, and Burbank are among the varieties com-
monly grown in the North and the northeastern sections of the
country. Certain varieties of plums, like Burbank, have a spreading
habit of growth and should be planted about 15 feet apart; others,
like Shropshire, are more upright in their habit of growth and may
be planted as close as 12 feet apart.
Plums require a fairly rich soil and do best when they are given
good clean cultivation.
CHERRIES
Wherever climatic conditions are suitable cherries are probably
the most desirable of all tree fruits for growing in the subsistence
garden. They require the same soil and cultural conditions as apples.
The trees may be planted as closely as 20 or 25 feet without serious
crowding. Ho we ver : cherry trees sometimes live to a great age and
become quite large; m that case every second tree can be removed.
From the standpoint of pollination, cherries, especially sweet cherries,
are like apples, and it is necessary to have trees of more than one
variety growing near each other in order to secure satisfactory crops
of fruit. Cherries are not adapted for growing in the southern
districts.
Among the sour cherries Early Richmond and Montmorency are
the leaders, although English Morello is still planted as a late va-
riety. Among the sweet varieties Black Tartarian, Yellow Spanish,
and Windsor are popular in the sections to which this bulletin
applies.
DISEASES AND INSECT PESTS OF THE PEACH, PLUM, AND CHEERY
Certain diseases and insect pests of the peach, plum, and cherry,
such as scab, rot, the San Jose scale, leaf curl, and the plum curculio,
can be controlled by spraying or dusting as follows :
1. Spray with lime-sulphur, 1 pint to 1 gaUon of water, before the buds begin
to sweU in late winter, or in the faU after all leaves are gone. Dusts used at
this time are not effective.
2. Spray with wettable sulphur one-half pound and arsenate of lead 15
rounded teaspoonfuls in 5 gallons of water, or 3 rounded teaspoonfuls per
gallon, or dust with dusting sulphur 9 parts and arsenate of lead 1 part (a)
about 10 days after the blossom petals have fallen or when the shucks have
been shed by the young fruits and (&) about 2 weeks later.
3. Spray with one-half pound of wettable sulphur in 5 gallons of water, or
dust with dusting sulphur about 2 to 4 weeks before the fruit is expected to
ripen. No arsenate of lead should be used in this application.
Since these sprays and dusts contain poison, all sprayed fruit
should be washed thoroughly before it is eaten or offered for sale.
These sprays may also be applied to other fruit trees with safety.
As a clean-up measure, all diseased or wormy fruit should be picked
from the trees and from the ground and destroyed.


[page 57]

54 FARMERS' BULLETIN 1746
Plum and cherry black knot.-The large black warty growths on
limbs of plum and cherry trees should be removed and destroyed as
soon as recognized by cutting off the affected limb at least 6 inches
below the knot. Winter spraying with bordeaux mixture prevents
infection.
Insects.-There is another very important group of insects that
attack peach, plum, and cherry trees. These insects damage the bark
or sapwood of the trunk and branches of the trees, and their presence
is usually indicated by the formation of gum, commonly known as
"gummosis."
The peach borer is considered the most devastating of these insects.
It works mainly at the base of the tree. The presence of these borers
can be detected by the presence of the gummy formation, and if a
careful examination is made the worms will be found cutting tunnels
in the bark of the tree trunk at the ground level. The trees should
be examined during the early spring and again late in the summer
and the worms removed by means of a sharp-pointed knife or a wire.
About 1 ounce of paradichlorobenzene^2 may be spread in a ring
around the base of the tree and then mounded over with earth. In
northern localities this should be done during August but later in the
South. The gas formed by this chemical, which is similar in appear-
ance to naphthalene flakes, will smother the worms in their tunnels.
It should not be used around trees that are less than 4 years old.
Other bark-eating insects of the peach in particular are bark
beetles and shot-hole borers. The presence of these insects is also
indicated by the exudation of the gum from the trunk and branches
of the trees. In cases of severe infestation the trees are reasonably
sure to be killed and should be removed and burned.
REFERENCE PUBLICATIONS
Farmers' Bulletin No. 879, Home Storage of Vegetables.
Farmers' Bulletin No. 1001, Growing Fruit for Home Use.
Farmers' Bulletin No. 1044, The City Home Garden.
Farmers' Bulletin No. 1242, Permanent Fruit and Vegetable
Gardens.
Farmers' Bulletin No. 1246, The Peach Borer.
Farmers' Bulletin No. 1371, Diseases and Insects of Garden Vege-
tables.
Farmers' Bulletin No. 1762, Home Canning of Fruits, Vegetables,
and Meats.
Farmers' Bulletin No. 1673, The Farm Garden.
Miscellaneous Publication No. 136, Conservation of Fertilizer
Materials from Minor Sources.
Leaflet No. 70, Home Mixing of Fertilizers.
Any of the above bulletins, with the exception of Farmers' Bulletin
No. 1673, which is priced at 10 cents, may be secured from the
Superintendent of Documents, Government Printing Office, Wash-
ington, D. C, by sending 5 cents in coin for each copy.
2 See Farmers' Bulletin 1246, The Peach Borer.
U. S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE: 1938
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, Washington, D. C. - - - - Price 10 cents
