[page 1]


Historic, archived document

Do not assume content reflects current
scientific knowledge, policies, or practices.


[page 2]

.1
1 ;;:;:;:::::;:;::;;:::;:::;:::::;:::::::v:;:::;:;:
i:;:;:;:;:;:;:;:;:;:;:;:;:;x;x;:;:;:;:;:;:;:;:;
'.-.■.'.-.■.-.■.■■■.-.-.■.-.■.-.".■.■.■.■.■.■,■.-.■
: :
REOEIVtD
j
%»?. eg ^
IN
OacÁí/a^coú
III ILS. DEPARTMENT o/* AGRICULTURE
FARMERS' BULLETIN NO. 1508


[page 3]

THEIR relatively small size and adaptability to a variety
of conditions make it possible to keep poultry in the back
yards of suburban and town residences.
By keeping a back-yard poultry flock, the family is supplied
with eggs and poultry meat of a quahty and freshness some-
times difficult to obtain. The eggs and the poultry meat are
desirable sources of food of animal origin. A small flock of
chickens will consume waste products from the kitchen and
the garden, which helps to reduce the feed cost.
This bulletin discusses such subjects as suitable breeds,
houses, methods of feeding, and sanitary requirements.
Persons who desire information on other branches of the
poultry industry should write to the Department, stating the
subjects in which they are interested.
Washington, D. C. Issued May 1923
Revised April 1941


[page 4]

POULTRY KEEPING IN BACK YARDS
By ALFRED R. LEE, associate poultry husbandman, Animal Husbandry Division,
Bureau of Animal Industry x
Contents
Page
Purpose of a back-yard poultry flock 1
Making a start 1
Selection of stock 2
Incubation and. brooding 3
Feeding chicks 8
Feeding hens 9
Raising bantams 10
Houses for laying stock 10
Floor 11
Interior fixtures 12
Page
Yards for laying stock 13
Batteries for chicks 13
Batteries for laying hens 15
Use of artificial light 16
Selecting hens for egg production _._ 17
Controlling diseases, lice, and mites 17
Recordkeeping 19
Finishing chickens for the table 19
Home methods of preserving eggs 19
PURPOSE OF A BACK-YARD POULTRY FLOCK
THE back-yard flock is kept primarily for egg production and
should provide the table with fresh eggs during most of the year,
and, at certain seasons, furnish chickens to eat. A small home flock
makes an interesting and desirable hobby, especially for those who
work indoors. It involves little cash outlay, and the home pro-
vides a market for the products. The keeping of fowls serves a good
purpose in utilizing various products which might otherwise be wasted.
Droppings and litter from the poultry house provide a desirable
fertihzer for the garden and lawn.
The keeping of chickens is adapted for villages and for the suburbs
of towns and small cities. However, many cities and large towns have
ordinances against keeping chickens. Hens may be kept for egg
production without having a male bird in the flock, thus eliminating
the objectionable morning crowing of the roosters.
MAKING A START
A start may be made in back-yard poultry keeping by purchasing
hatchery eggs, day-old chicks, started chicks, and partly grown or well-
developed pullets. Ordinarily the two latter methods are preferred
because it is not usually convenient for the city dweller to hatch eggs
or raise chicks. If one intends to buy day-old chicks they should be
obtained early in the year, preferably in March or April. Late-
hatched chicks rarely, if ever, do so well as the early-hatched ones.
Whether day-old chicks, pullets, or adult birds are to be purchased, it
is advisable to obtain them from a reliable breeder who is known to
have healthy stock bred for high egg production. From 8 to 15 birds
should be sufficient to provide the average family with a liberal supply
of eggs for most of the year. When it is practical to sell eggs to neigh-
i M. A. Jull, the senior author of the former edition of this bulletin, resigned from the Bureau in 1936.
1


[page 5]

¿ FARMERS' BULLETIN 1508
bors-which is done in many casos -25 or more birds may be kept to
advantage. Most back-yard poultry keepers sell some surplus eggs
and chickens, and many families find this a good source of extra
revenue.
SELECTION OF STOCK
The more, common breeds of chickens arc suitable for a back-yard
flock kept primarily for egg and meat production. These breeds
include among others the Plymouth Rocks (fig. ]), Rhode Island Reds
(iig. 2), Wyandottes (fig. 3), New Hampshires, and Leghorns (fig. 4).
-Sí-
FIGURE 1.- A Barred Plymouth Kock hen that laid 288 eggs in her pullet year.
The Plymouth Hock is a popular general-purpose breed.
There arc many other breeds that are kept to some extent in small
flocks. The first four breeds are popularly known as general-purpose
breeds; they lay brown eggs and are especially suitable for back yards.
If bred for high egg production, they lay well and also make good table
poultry. The Leghorn belongs to the Mediterranean class, produces
white eggs, and while it is a good egg-laying breed, it is not a good
meat producer and is more difficult to confine. If the eggs are not
used for hatching it is not necessary to keep a male bird in the flock.
When eggs for hatching are desired, only the most vigorous and
best-grown birds should be used. Yearling hens usually make better
breeders than pullets, but cockerels generally give better fertility than
yearling or 2-year-old birds. In the light breeds, such as the Leg-


[page 6]

POULTRY KEEPING 1\ BACK YARDS 3
horns, one male is usually mated to 15 to 20 females. In the general-
purpose breeds, such as the Plymouth Ilocks, one male should be
provided for every 12 to 15 females.
FIGUIIB 2.- Single-Comb Khode Island Rod female. This is one of the most
popular general-purpose breeds for egg and meat production.
INCUBATION AND BROODING
Both the natural and the artificial methods are used in hatching
and brooding chicks in small ilocks. For a few chicks the natural
method is the easiest and least expensive. The sale of day-old chicks
from hatcheries has largely done away with small incubators for back-
yard docks. The Department has published a bulletin on "Incubation
and Brooding of Chickens" (Fanners' Bulletin 1538), and these
subjects will be discussed, therefore, only very briefly in the present
bulletin.
NATURAL INCUBATION AND BROODING
The broody hen (fig. 5), is usually set on a straw nest placed in a
box about 18 inches square. Thirteen to fifteen eggs are put in the
nest, which should be located where the hen will not be disturbed.
Sitting hens should be well fed on grain and mash.


[page 7]

I'AliMKHS' lULLETIX 150S
FIGURE 3.-A Hock of White Wyandottes.
FIGURE 4. A flock of Single-Comb White Leidiorns is good for egs production,
but the hens are more apt (o fly over fences than those of the heavier breeds.


[page 8]

POULTRY KEEPING IN BACK YARDS 5
ChicKs should be removed from the nest to the brood coop about
24 hours after they are hatched. If the weather is cold 12 chicks are
enough for a hen, while in warm weather a hen can care for 15 or
more chicks. A box coop (fig. 6) makes a good brood coop, but
the simplest type is the common A-shaped coop. Second-hand pack-
ing boxes may easily be made over for brood coops. A small, covered
run can be made for each coop and is especially desirable where there
is danger of losses from cats, hawks, or other pests.
FIGURE 5.-An inexpensive nest for a sitting hen. The wire cover protects the
hen and keeps her from leaving the nest.
BUYING DAY-OLD CHICKS
Many small-flock owners depend on the purchase of day-old
chicks for starting or reproducing their flocks. Since the cost of the
chick is such a small part of the value of the mature pullet, it pays
to use only good-quality chicks. Day-old chicks of the highest
quality are produced in hatcheries which use breeding Hocks that
are of high-producing stock and are rigidly selected. Many hatchery
flocks are tested for pullorum disease and the chicks sold as pullorum-
tested chicks.
ARTIFICIAL BROODING
The brooder should be started at about 95° F. (fig. 7), and be ready
before the chicks are received. This temperature skould be reduced
about 3M0 F. a week until the temperature is about 70°. It is very
important to train the chicks to the use of the hover for the first day
or two. An enclosure of wire netting is used to keep the chicks close to
the brooder (fig. 8). Chicks usually need artificial heat for 4 to 8 weeks,
depending on the outside temperature and when the chicks are hatched.


[page 9]

6 FARMEK.S' BULLETIN 1508
Cleanliness is essential, and the brooder house should be cleaned
frequently. The floors should be covered with clean dry litter or
sand to absorb the moisture of the droppings. Sheets of newspapers,
FIGURE ti.-Well-made brood coops for confining the mother hens.
FiGuiiii 7. -These baby chicks have just been receivec
the electric brooder.
67572-8
and are being put under
which arc changed daily, may be used under and around the hover in
place of litter for the first few days.
The first rule for getting a good profit from poultry is to have high-
quality chicks that are hatched early, and the next is to keep them
growing so that they will reach laying maturity before the beginning
of cold weather. Sexed pullet chicks can be obtained, thus éliminât-


[page 10]

POULTRY KEEPIXt; IX BACK YARDS
ing nearly all the cockerels. In many cases it may be more practical
to buy started pullets in the summer or well-matured pullets in the
fall rather than to raise any baby chicks. Early hatched pullets
should be obtained in order to get eggs in the fall and in the early
part of the winter. Young chickens should be raised apart from the
24386-B
FIGURE 8.-A coal-stove brooder with a brood of chicks. This typo of brooder
is well adapted for brooding chicks in flocks of from 150 to 350.
old stock and kept on clean land; otherwise the chicks are likely to
contract disease from contaminated soil or to become infested with
worms. Very small bare yards soon become contaminated. Under
such conditions the chickens may do better if they are raised
IH M H H H » ^SS&il^yjyr ,
FIGURE 9.-Home-made lamp brooder and pen with outside wire sun porch for
brooding chicks.
in the house with an outside wire-floored sun porch (figs. 9 and 10).
This keeps the chickens entirely off the ground. Picking or can-
nibalism is likely to develop when chickens are confined if they are
crowded or are not given close attention. Young chickens should be
kept in separate pens away from the laying hens.
291254°-41 2


[page 11]

8 FARMERS' BULLETIN 15 OS
FIGURE 10.-A broodor house with a wire-floored sun porch.
FEEDING CHICKS
Most back-yard poultry keepers find it moro practical to use com-
mercially mixed feeds rather than to buy the ingredients and mix
their own feed. Many of those commercially mixed foods are of
excellent quality. For persons who desire, to prepare their foods the
following formulas, taken from Farmers' Bulletin No. 1841, "The
Feeding of Chickens," are suggested.
STARTING AND GROWING MASH
J'arf*, by
Ingredient ueigltt
Ground yellow corn 21. 0
Wheat middlings 30. 0
Wheat bran 10.0
Dried skim milk (or dried butter-
milk) 10. 0
Meat scrap 15. 0
10. 0
1)
Alfalfa-leaf meal.
Ground limestone
shell)
Salt mixture
Cod-liver oil
(or oyster-
2.0
1. 0
1. 0
Total 100.0
ALL-MASH STARTING AX
GROWING DIET
Ingredient
Ground yellow corn
Wheat middlings
Wheat bran .
Dried skim milk (or dried butter
milk)
Meat scrap
Fish meal
Soybean meal
Corn gluten meal
Alfalfa-leaf meal
Ground limestone (or oyster-
shell)
Common salt (or salt mixture)
Cod-liver oil
Total 100.0
Parts, --■:
Height
32. 0
20. 0
15. 0
5. 0
5. 0
5. 0
5. 0
5. II
o. o
1. 5
5
5
The salt mixture listed in these diets shouh
of common salt and 1.7 pounds of anhydrous 9 ñ
consist of 100 pounds
langanous sulfate (or
pounds of manganous sulfate tetrahydrate). The use of this salt
mixturo is optional in those diets


[page 12]

POULTRY KEEPING IN BACK YARDS 9
In feeding chicks, if a combination of mash and grain is to be used,
the chicks are given a suitable starting-or starting and growing-
mash, and the feeding of cracked grain is usually begun when the
chicks are about 4 weeks old. Only a small amount of grain is fed at
first and the quantity is gradually increased. After the chicks are
about 8 weeks old, the grain is more coarsely cracked. When the
all-mash method is used, the chicks may be fed a starting and growing
diet until a few weeks before they are ready to lay, at which time the
feed should be changed slowly to an all-mash laying diet. Another
method is to use an all-mash starting diet for the first 6 to 8 weeks
and then change to an all-mash growing diet. The starting mash
should contain cod-liver oil or some other suitable source of vitamin
D. The mash of all chickens kept in confinement should contain
vitamin D. * '
FEEDING HENS
Commercially mixed feeds are commonly used for feeding most
small flocks. The following laying mash to be used in mash-and-
grain feeding and an all-mash laying diet are taken from Farmers'
Bulletin No. 1841, "The Feeding of Chickens."
LAYING MASH ALL-MASH LAYING DIET
Parts, by Parts, by
Ingredient weight Ingredient weight
Wheat middlings 32. 0 Ground corn 40. 0
Wheat bran 20. 0 Wheat middlings 20. 0
Dried skim milk (or dried butter- Wheat bran 15. 0
milk) 10. 0 Dried skim milk (or dried butter-
Meat scrap 14. 0 milk) 5. 0
Alfalfa-leaf meal 13. 0 Meat scrap 6. ó
Ground limestone (or oyster- Alfalfa-leaf meal 7. 0
shell) 6. 5 Ground limestone (or oyster-
Steamed bonemeal .5 shell) 3. 4
Common salt (or salt mixture) _ _ 1.2 Steamed bonemeal .7
Cod-liver oil 2.8 Common salt (or salt mixture) _ _ 1.0
 Cod-liver oil 1. 4
Total 100.0
Total 100.0
This laying mash and most commercial mashes are used with a
grain mixture of several ingredients or whole or cracked corn. The
all-mash diet is fed without any other grain. The composition of
the salt mixture is the same as that used in the chick diets. Inas-
much as these mashes contain all the calcium that is necessary, addi-
tional oystershell and limestone grit should not be given to the hens.
Most commercial mashes contain only part of the calcium that is
required; in that case it is necessary to supply additional calcium in
the form of oystershell or limestone. Since some commercial mashes
contain all the calcium needed it is important to follow the feeding
instructions recommended by the manufacturer.
The mash-and-grain method is the one commonly used. The
grain may be fed in the litter, but a more sanitary method is to feed
the grain in hoppers. When grain is fed twice a day, about one-third
of the total quantity is generally fed in the morning and the remainder
late in the afternoon. Dry mash is fed in a hopper and is kept before
the birds all the time. Plenty of feeding and drinking space is
essential.


[page 13]

10 FARMERS' BULLETIN' 15 0 S
19798=B
-"IOUKE 11.- Rose-Comb Black Ran tarn, male. A jxipular breed witli many city people.
RAISING BANTAMS
Bantams roquiro only small coops, consume much less feed than
larger birds, but lay fewer and much smaller eggs. The small size
ot the bantams appeals to many persons, and they are frequently
kept for ornamental, purposes and
as children's pets. The standard
breeds of bantams are miniatures of
the larger breeds (fig. 11). They
are described in the Department's
bulletins on breeds of chickens.
Adult bantams consume about 20
to 25 pounds of feed in a year.
Their eggs vary in size from about
11 to 16 ounces per dozen.
Bantams are kept in small houses
and small runs. The house shown
in figure 12 is small enough to be
picked up by the handles and
moved, together with the attached
run, to fresh ground. This house
is 3 feet 10 inches wide by 4 feet
6 inches deep. It is 5 feet 6 inches
high in front and 4 feet 5 inches high
in the rear. The attached covered
run is the same width as the
house and is 5 feet deep. The front
of the tun is 2 feet 8 inches high and, where attached to the house, 3
feet high. Such a house and run will accommodate from 6 to 10
bantam hens and a male bird. Wire-floored sun porches may be used
to advantage both for raising young bantams and for mature birds
(fig. 10). Wire, gravel, or cinder
floors in these outside yards aid in
keeping them sanitary.
HOUSES FOR LAYING STOCK
The poultry house for the laving
flock should be comfortable, light
and dry, and have a good supply of
fresh air but be free from drafts.
The building should be on a well-
drained site. It should have a
southern or southeastern exposure,
and the number of windows and
openings and the amount of ventila-
tion should be adapted to the cli-
mate. Frames covered with glass isau-c
substitutes are used to close part or FIGURE 12.-A convenient movable
all of the openings during the winter bantam house with covered run
The open front and certain of the attached-
glass substitutes admit ultraviolet rays of the sun, which are excluded
by ordinary glass windows. Glass substitutes must bo kept clean
and free from dust in order to admit these desirable sun rays.
The size of the house, naturally, will be determined by the number
of birds to be kept. A safe working rule is to allow about 4 square


[page 14]

PüTLTRY KKKPIXG IX BACK YARDS 11
feet of floor space per bird. The lighter birds, such as Leghorns,
usually need a little less floor space than such breeds as the Plymouth
Rocks, Rhode Island Reds, or Wyandottes. It cannot be said that
any particular type of poultry house is the best, since local conditions
determine to a largo degree the typo that will give good results. The
poultry departments of the State colleges of agriculture are prepared
to make recommendations as to the most suitable type of house for
their States.
For practical purposes cither a square or rectangular house is more
satisfactory than those of other shapes. It should be about 0 feet
13736-C
FIGURE 13.-A sood type of simple shed-roof house for a moderate-sized poultry
flock in the suburbs. The dimensions are 10 feet by 12 feet by 7 feet in front and 5 feet in the rear.
high in front and at least 4% to 5 feet high at the back. The depth
of the house is a matter of importance because the deeper the house
the less possibility of drafts reaching the birds when they are roost-
ing at the rear. A depth of at least 10 feet is desirable from the
standpoint of both winter and summer comfort. Ordinarily a shed-
roof type of house is the most economical to build (figs. 13 and 14).
Most roofs are one-fourth or less pitch, but shingle roofs should be
one-third pitch.
FLOOR
All things considered, concrete makes the most satisfactory floor
since it is moro sanitary and durable than any other kind. Board
floors are also satisfactory and have the advantage over a concrete
floor in that the house can be moved more easily to a new location A
board floor is preferable to an earth floor. If a board floor is used it
should be raised at least 8 inches off the ground. The floor of the
poultry house should be covered with 2 or 3 inches of litter-clean


[page 15]

12 lAHMKKS' iU'LLKTIN 15 0 8
wheat or rye straw is satisfactory. Whenever the litter gets damp
and dirty it should be removed and replaced with new litter.
INTERIOR FIXTURES
The roosts should be located at the rear of the house, away from the
front openings. They should be placed about 2}i feet above the floor
and should be from 13 to 15 inches apart on center. They are usually
made of 2- by 4-inch or 2- by 2-inch pieces, with the corners slightly
rounded. The location is shown in figures 3 and 18. Leghorns
FKíURB 14.-A shed-roof typo of laying house arranged with double yards. This
house is 14 feet square and 7J4 feet high in front and 5^ feet high in the rear.
refiuire about 8 inches perch space per bird; Plymouth Rocks and
similar breeds, 10 inches. The droppings board should be about (i or
8 inches beneath the roosts and should be 20 inches wide for one roost
and about 34 inches wide for two. The board may be made of
matched lumber and should have a smooth surface comparatively
free from cracks. It should be cleaned at least twice a week. The
manure may be used as fertilizer for the flower or vegetable garden
or put on the lawn, but should not be used on ground over which the
chickens run.
Nests should be 12 to 14 inches square and may be placed on the
end walls or on partitions. They should be high enough so that the
hens can work under them. Making the back and ends of wire facili-
tates ventilation of the nests. Cheap nests may be made of empty
orange boxes or egg crates. Nests are usually arranged in tiers (fig.


[page 16]

POULTRY KEEPING IN BACK YARDS 13
18). Provide a nest for about every four or five hens in the flock.
A broody coop made with a slat or wire bottom is needed in which to
confine broody hens in the spring to break up their desire to sit. This
coop is also very useful for any birds which may need special attention
during the year.
An open hopper so constructed and located in the laying house
that the hens can help themselves to dry mash at any time is neces-
sary for best results in egg production. One of these is shown in
figure 3, and this as well as other types can be purchased in almost
any poultry-supply house, or a home-made hopper can be made.
Two important features of such a hopper are that it makes the dry
mash easily accessible and at the same time prevents waste of feed.
Hoppers may be used also for supplying grit and oystershell to the
hens in the laying house, provided these minerals are not mixed
with the feed.
Clean water is an important part of the hen's ration. A good-
sized galvanized-iron water pail or pan is all that is necessary to hold
the water supply, but it should be located about 18 inches above the
floor, as shown in figure 18, in order that straw and dirt may not get
into the water. The pail should be easy to empty and clean and
should be protected so that the birds cannot get into the water with
their feet.
YARDS FOR LAYING STOCK
Laying hens may be kept indoors the year round, but most poultry
keepers prefer to provide some outside yard space. Hens confined
to the house will lay well and keep healthy provided they have
comfortable, well-ventilated houses and are fed suitable rations con-
taining cod-liver oil or some other source of vitamin D. A wire-
covered outside yard or sun porch is advised. This should be about
the same size as the house, with a wire, cinder, or concrete floor
which keeps the chickens off the soil and is easily cleaned. For
larger yards a 5- or 6-foot fence is needed, and it may be necessary
to clip one wing of birds of the light breeds to keep them confined.
Some poultry keepers either alternate their chicken yards with the
garden plot each year or use the garden for the chickens during part
of the year.
To prevent the soil from becoming contaminated, it is desirable
to provide a double yard for the laying stock, so arranged that one
yard can be growing a crop of green feed or grass while the other is
used for the chickens (fig. 14). It is also good practice to lime the
soil occasionally.
BATTERIES FOR CHICKS
The keeping of chicks in batteries is a relatively new practice.
This method is used mainly by hatcherymen and broiler producers
and is particularly adapted to holding chicks for 1 to 2 weeks and
raising broilers in complete confinement. Batteries are used con-
siderably for brooding chicks and to a limited extent for keeping
laying hens.
Battery brooding (fig. 15) requires regular care and good manage-
ment to raise the chicks successfully. As the chicks are closely
confined they are absolutely dependent on the operator. Unless
conditions are kept just right, difficulties such as picking overcrowd-


[page 17]

14 FARMERS BULLETIN 1508
ing, and leg weakness arc more likely to occur in battery brooding
than where the chicks have outside yards.
Feeding is extremely important in battery management as the
chicks receive no sunlight and have no chance to pick up other
feeds. The chicks are fed all-mash rations which include milk and
minerals. Mash is kept before the chicks all the time. Fresh
FIGURE 15.-BatU-ry brooders tor chicks.
green feed is not ordinarily supplied, but alfalfa-leaf meal is generally
included in the mash as a substitute for green feed. Cod-liver oil or
other sources of vitamin D must be included in the ration. The use
of this oil pïevents the type of leg weakness in chicks caused by lack
of vitamin D and sunlight.
The all-mash starting and growing diet previously mentioned is
recommended for feeding chicks in Hattery brooders. Chicks for
broilers may be raised without any change in their ration except


[page 18]

POULTRY KEEPING IN BACK YARDS 15
oniittiiifr the cod-liver oil for 2 weeks before marketing. Additional
dielssuilable for feedinu' poultry in batteries will be tumid in Ciivular
788, Nutritive Requirements and Feed Formulas for Chickens.
Chicks' picking one another often causes great loss in battery
brooding, and this habit is difficult to control. Ruby-colored light
in the brooder or in the room either from colored bulbs or from stained
windows, darkening the brooder room, "tipping" tiie upper beak of
the chickens, and the use of salves and mechanical devices are some
of the methods recommended for overcoming picking. Another con-
trol method is to increase the salt in the diet for 4 or 5 days, adding
0.5 percent of salt to an all-mash diet or 1 percent to the mash in a
grain and mash diet. Overcrowding the chickens aggravates this
FIGURE 16.-Batteries for laying hens. Note sloping wire floor which causes eggs to roll to the tray at the front.
habit. Because chicks grow rapidly there is a tendency to permit
the batteries to become crowded. Good ventilation in the room is
very essential for chicks in batteries.
BATTERIES FOR LAYING HENS
^ Batteries are used to a very limited extent for laying hens (fig. 16).
They enable the poultryman to know the daily egg production of
each hen, making it easy to cull the poor layers as soon as they cease
to be profitable. Growing pullets should be available for replace-
ments m order to utilize the battery equipment efficiently. Pullets
must have good vigor and vitality to do well in batteries. With
good equipment and proper management, hens in batteries should
lay approximately the same number of eggs as hens kept on the floor
in well-built hen houses. Keeping each hen in a separate compart-
ment in the batteries prevents cannibalism, which is often the cause
of considerable mortality when laying flocks are kept confined.


[page 19]

1(3 FARMERS' BULLETIN 1508
The battery method requires considerable equipment, and the per
hen investment is much greater than in the single-wall, unheated
laying houses very generally used where hens are kept on the floor.
An all-mash diet is recommended for feeding laying liens in bat-
teries. Mash is kept before the liens all the time, and feeds which
are coarsely ground are preferred. Pellet feeding is being used to
some extent for hens.
The use of the complete battery system, including the raising of
pullets in batteries to laying age, is extremely limited and is still
in the experimental stage.
USE OF ARTIFICIAL LIGHT
Many owners of smaller flocks are using artificial lights in the
laying houses to give the pullets a 12- to 14-hour day during the
winter months. The use of artificial lights not only increases the
FKíURE 17.-Appearance of the comb and wattles of a hen in laying condition
(left) and one not in laying condition (right). The hen at the left laid 300 eggs
in a year; the one at the right, only 55.
proportion of eggs laid during the fall and winter months when egg
prices are highest but also helps to keep the birds in better condition.
Usually the lights are used on the pullets only from about October 1
through February or March. Forty-watt electric lamps equipped
with 10-inch reflectors are placed from 5 to 6 feet above the floor in
the pens (tig. 3).
Lights may be used in the morning or both morning and evening.
Automatic devices are generally used to control the light. With


[page 20]

POULTRY KEEPING IN BACK YARDS 17
evening lights some method of dimming the light is necessary to
allow the hens to go onto the roosts before the lights are shut off
completely. In cold weather the water should be kept from freezing
during the night, if lights are used.
SELECTING HENS FOR EGG PRODUCTION
The laying and breeding qualities of the flock can be improved by
selecting the good producers and culling the poor layers. The best
birds will have early maturity, good rate of production, little broodi-
ness, and persistent production. Production during the second year
is generally about 20 percent less than during the first year, so that it
usually does not pay to keep hens for egg production more than 2
years. Late summer or early fall is the best time to cull the flock
because at that time it is easy to distinguish the good from the poor
layers. The best layers will molt late, and the yellow color will be
bleached out of their shanks and beaks. The appearance of the comb
and wattles and the condition of the pubic bones, abdomen, and vent
are good indications of the laying condition of the hen (fig. 17). A
practical way of identifying the poor birds is to mark them with
different-colored bands.
CONTROLLING DISEASES, LICE, AND MITES
The removal of sick birds from the flock is a necessary precaution
against loss. In case of an outbreak of disease, consult a veterinarian
or communicate with your State agricultural college, giving a com-
plete description of the symptoms, and conditions under which
the flock is kept. After the sick birds are removed from the flock,
thoroughly clean and disinfect (fig. 18) the poultry house and all feed-
ing and watering equipment. If treatment of sick birds is advisable,
keep them confined while being treated. In many cases, in an out-
break of disease, it is better to kill the affected birds and burn or bury
them deeply. The Department has published a bulletin on poultry
diseases (Farmers' Bulletin 1652), which describes the symptoms of
diseases and suggests methods of prevention and treatment.
Sanitation is a very important factor in keeping down diseases and
parasites in poultry flocks. Land used for poultry should be kept
free from contamination. Some poultrymen lime their soil annually.
The poultry house should be kept clean and the floor well covered
with clean, dry litter. Comfortable, well-ventilated and well-lighted
houses, free from drafts or dampness, should be provided.
The floor of the poultry house should be scraped and the house
thoroughly cleaned and disinfected at least once a year. Mites may
be eradicated by using a suitable insecticide, such as anthracene oil,
on the roosts, roost supports, and nest boxes. This may be painted on
with a brush, or it may be diluted with an equal quantity of kerosene
and used as a spray. Crude petroleum is cheaper but less effective.
The under part of the roosts should be examined for mites every week
or two in warm weather and less frequently in cold weather. The
birds should be examined and, if lice are present, all the birds should
be treated with a good insecticide. One of the best of these is com-
mercial sodium fluoride, and a small pinch of it should be rubbed into
the feathers of the head, neck, back, breast, each thigh, below each
wing, at the tail head, and under the vent (fig. 19). A simpler treat-


[page 21]

18 FARMERS' BULLETIN 1508
FiüUKE 18.-Thorougli cleaning and spraying help to keep the poultry house
sanitary so that the chicKcns will be heaithy and free from insect pests. Note
the windows below the roosts and the opening under the roof to provide extra
ventilation. Arranging the nests in tiers on the wall at the right allows for
cleaning the floor beneath. The rack near the nests is for the water pail.
MA 4568
FiauKE 19.-Pinch method of applying sodium fluoride to a fowl infested with lice.


[page 22]

POULTRY KEEPING IN BACK YARDS 19
ment for lice is to apply a thin ribbon of a 40-percent solution of
nicotine sulphate on the top of the roosts just before the birds go onto
the roosts.
RECORD KEEPING
Owners of small flocks usually like to keep records of returns and
expenses of their poultry flocks. The most essential records are the
daily egg production, a cash account of receipts and expenses, and a
yearly inventory. Estimated values of poultry meat and eggs used
in the household should be included in the receipts.
FINISHING CHICKENS FOR THE TABLE
If there is a special market for dressed fowls it may pay the grower
to feed a fattening ration to the birds that are selected for the purpose.
Ordinarily there is not mulch to be gained by small-flock owners
attempting to finish or fatten their chickens before they market them,
especially if they are in good condition as a result of having been
raised on well-balanced diets. However, considerable weight may be
gained by healthy chickens that aire not in good flesh by feeding them
liberally on a suitable diet.
In finishing young cockerels for broilers it is necessary to feed
more protein than in feeding older birds because the cockerels are
still growing. They will make the best gains if placed in small pens
and fed a mash moistened to a crumbly consistency with milk or
buttermilk, two or three times a day. The first few feedings should
be relatively light, but beginning with the last feeding on the second
day the chickens may be given all the wet mash they will eat in half
an hour.
The appearance and condition of dressed poultry depend greatly
on the care used in the killing, packing, and cooling. Chickens
should be dressed preferably when the weather is cool, when the
birds are to be used soon, or when it will take only a few hours to
reach the market. No solid food should be given the chickenë for
24 hours before killing, but plenty of water should be supplied.
Market fowls may be either scalded and picked or dry-picked
after being killed. Scalding is the easier method. Dry pickin|g is
more difficult, but it results in a much more attractive fowl, which
may sell more readily on some markets. The dry-picking method
also requires a* special method of killing the bird by cutting the
jugular vein in the back of the mouth and sticking the knife blade
into the brain through the roof of the mouth.
HOME METHODS OF PRESERVING EGGS
During the spring and early summer, when eggs are abundant and
reasonable in price, they may be preserved for winter use. Fresh eggs
properly preserved may be kept for 6 to 9 months and used with good
results. Those laid during March, April, and May usually keep
better than eggs laid later in the season.
Only fresh eggs with sound, strong shells should be preserved, and
any eggs which are soiled, cracked, or even slightly checked should
not be used. For 14 to 15 dozen medium-sized eggs, use 1 quart of
water glass to 9 quarts of water that has been boiled and cooled.
Measure the water into a 5-gallon crock or galvanized can which has


[page 23]

20 FARMERS' BULLETIN 15 08
been thoroughly cleaned and scalded. Add the water glass and stir
the mixture thoroughly. Place the eggs in the water-glass solution,
and be careful to have at least 1 inch of the solution covering the eggs
at all times. If there are not enough eggs on hand when the solution
is first made, more eggs may be added from time to time. Keep the
solution containing the preserved eggs in a cool, dry place. The
container should be tightly covered to prevent evaporation.
Eggs may also be preserved in limewater obtained by slaking 2
pounds of lime in water and mixing the clear solution with 5 gallons
of boiled water. The use of galvanized containers is not advised for
the limewater solution.
The eggs should be removed from the preservative only as needed
for immediate use and should be washed to remove the coating which
covers the shell. When eggs preserved in water glass are to be
boiled, a small hole should be made in the shell with a pin at the large
end to allow the air in the egg to escape.
U. S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE; 1950
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U. S. Government Printing Office
Washington 25, D. C. - Price 10 cents
