Historic, Archive Document

Do not assume content reflects current
scientific knowledge, policies, or practices.


Complete Guide to
Home Canning

Guide 1

Principles of Home Canning


United States
Department of
Agriculture


National

Agricultural

Library

Advancing Access to
Global Information for
Agriculture


Guide 1

inciples of Home Canning

Table of Contents, Guide 1
Principles of Home Canning
Section


Page


Why can foods?

- c3gp/

5

How canning preserves foods

5

Ensuring safe canned foods

6

Food acidity and processing methods

8

Process adjustments at high altitudes

10

Equipment and methods not recommended

10

Ensuring high-quality canned foods

11

Maintaining color and flavor in canned food

11

Advantages of hot packing

12

Controlling headspace

13

Jars and lids

14

Jar cleaning

15

Sterilization of empty jars

15

Lid selection, preparation, and use

15

Recommended canners

17

Boiling-water canners

18

Using boiling-water canners

18

Pressure canners

19

Using pressure canners

21

Selecting the correct processing time

23

Example of using tables for determining proper process time

24

Cooling jars

26

Testing jar seals

26

Reprocessing unsealed jars

27

Storing canned foods

27

Identifying and handling spoiled canned food

27

Preparing pickled and fermented foods

28

Ingredients

29

Pickles with reduced salt content

29

Firming agents

30

Preventing spoilage

30

3


Section


Page


Preparing butters, jams, jellies, and marmalades

30

Ingredients

31

Jams and jellies with reduced sugar

31

Preventing spoilage

32

Methods of making jams and jellies

32

Canned foods for special diets

32

Canning without sugar

33

Canning without salt (reduced sodium)

33

Canning fruit-based baby foods

33

How much should you can?

33

Glossary of Terms

35

Index of Foods

39

4


Why can foods?


Canning can be a safe and economical way to preserve quality food at home. Disre-
garding the value of your labor, canning homegrown food may save you half the
cost of buying commercially canned food. Canning favorite and special products to
be enjoyed by family and friends is a fulfilling experience and a source of pride for
many people.

Many vegetables begin losing some of their vitamins when harvested. Nearly half
the vitamins may be lost within a few days unless the fresh produce is cooled or
preserved. Within 1 to 2 weeks, even refrigerated produce loses half or more of
some of its vitamins. The heating process during canning destroys from one-third to
one-half of vitamins A and C, thiamin, and riboflavin. Once canned, additional
losses of these sensitive vitamins are from 5 to 20 percent each year. The amounts
of other vitamins, however, are only slightly lower in canned compared with fresh
food. If vegetables are handled properly and canned promptly after harvest, they
can be more nutritious than fresh produce sold in local stores.

The advantages of home canning are lost when you start with poor quality fresh
foods; when jars fail to seal properly; when food spoils; and when flavors, texture,
color, and nutrients deteriorate during prolonged storage.

The information and guides that follow explain many of these problems and recom-
mend ways to minimize them.

How canning preserves foods

The high percentage of water in most fresh foods makes them very perishable.
They spoil or lose their quality for several reasons:

- growth of undesirable microorganisms- bacteria, molds, and yeasts,

- activity of food enzymes,

- reactions with oxygen,

- moisture loss.

Microorganisms live and multiply quickly on the surfaces of fresh food and on the
inside of bruised, insect-damaged, and diseased food. Oxygen and enzymes are
present throughout fresh food tissues.

Proper canning practices include:

- carefully selecting and washing fresh food,

- peeling some fresh foods,

- hot packing many foods,

- adding acids (lemon juice or vinegar) to some foods,

- using acceptable jars and self-sealing lids,

- processing jars in a boiling-water or pressure canner for the correct period of
time.


5


Collectively, these practices remove oxygen; destroy enzymes; prevent the growth of
undesirable bacteria, yeasts, and molds; and help form a high vacuum in jars. Good
vacuums form tight seals which keep liquid in and air and microorganisms out.


Ensuring safe canned foods

Growth of the bacterium Clostridium botulinum in canned food may cause
botulism- a deadly form of food poisoning. These bacteria exist either as spores or
as vegetative cells. The spores, which are comparable to plant seeds, can survive
harmlessly in soil and water for many years. When ideal conditions exist for growth,
the spores produce vegetative cells which multiply rapidly and may produce a
deadly toxin within 3 to 4 days of growth in an environment consisting of:

- a moist, low-acid food

- a temperature between 40° and 120°F

- less than 2 percent oxygen

Botulinum spores are on most fresh food surfaces. Because they grow only in the
absence of air, they are harmless on fresh foods.

Most bacteria, yeasts, and molds are difficult to remove from food surfaces. Wash-
ing fresh food reduces their numbers only slightly. Peeling root crops, underground
stem crops, and tomatoes reduces their numbers greatly. Blanching also helps, but
the vital controls are the method of canning and making sure the recommended
research-based process times, found in these guides, are used.

The processing times in these guides ensure destruction of the largest expected
number of heat-resistant microorganisms in home-canned foods. Properly sterilized
canned food will be free of spoilage if lids seal and jars are stored below 95° F. Stor-
ing jars at 50° to 70°F enhances retention of quality.


TEMPERATURES FOR FOOD PRESERVATION


iture water boils
at sea level. Canning
temperature for acid
fruits, tomatoes, pickles, and
jellied products in a boiling-
water canner.


212T


180°F
165T


I40T

Maximum storage temperature

95°F - >

for canned foods.

Best storage temperatures

for canned and <C^~

dried foods.

40°F

Temperature water freezes.


32°F


Canning temperatures are used to
destroy most bacteria, yeasts,
and molds in acid foods. Time
required to kill these decreases
as temperatures increase.


\

\ Warming temperatures prevent
^growth, but may allow survival
/ of some microorganisms.


ning temperatures for low acid
vegetables, meat, and poultry in a

pressure canner.


I


DANGER ZONE

Temperatures between 40°F-140°F
allow rapid growth of bacteria,
yeast, and molds.


>


Cold temperatures permit slow growth
of some bacteria, yeasts, and molds.

Freezing temperatures stop growth of
microorganisms, but may allow some
to survive.


>


Best storage temperatures
for frozen foods.


Food acidity and processing methods


Whether food should be processed in a pressure canner or boiling-water canner to
control botulinum bacteria depends on the acidity in the food. Acidity may be natu-
ral, as in most fruits, or added, as in pickled food. Low-acid canned foods contain
too little acidity to prevent the growth of these bacteria. Acid foods contain enough
acidity to block their growth, or destroy them more rapidly when heated. The term
"pH" is a measure of acidity; the lower its value, the more acid the food. The acid-
ity level in foods can be increased by adding lemon juice, citric acid, or vinegar.

Low-acid foods have pH values higher than 4.6. They include red meats, seafood,
poultry, milk, and all fresh vegetables except for most tomatoes. Most mixtures of
low-acid and acid foods also have pH values above 4.6 unless their recipes include
enough lemon juice, citric acid, or vinegar to make them acid foods. Acid foods
have a pH of 4.6 or lower. They include fruits, pickles, sauerkraut, jams, jellies, mar-
malades, and fruit butters.

Although tomatoes usually are considered an acid food, some are now known to
have pH values slightly above 4.6. Figs also have pH values slightly above 4.6.
Therefore, if they are to be canned as acid foods, these products must be acidified
to a pH of 4.6 or lower with lemon juice or citric acid. Properly acidified tomatoes
and figs are acid foods and can be safely processed in a boiling-water canner.

Botulinum spores are very hard to destroy at boiling-water temperatures; the higher
the canner temperature, the more easily they are destroyed. Therefore, all low-acid
foods should be sterilized at temperatures of 240° to 250°F, attainable with pres-
sure canners operated at 10 to 15 PSIG. PSIG means pounds per square inch of
pressure as measured by gauge. The more familiar "PSI" designation is used here-
after in this publication. At temperatures of 240° to 250°F, the time needed to destroy
bacteria in low-acid canned food ranges from 20 to 100 minutes. The exact time de-
pends on the kind of food being canned, the way it is packed into jars, and the size
of jars. The time needed to safely process low-acid foods in a boiling-water canner
ranges from 7 to 1 1 hours; the time needed to process acid foods in boiling water
varies from 5 to 85 minutes.


1.0


Acid
Foods:
Use
Water Bath
and/or
pressure
canner


Low
Acid
Foods
Must
use
pressure
canner


Neutral


Strong Acid


4.0-


5.0-


6.0-


7.0-


14.0.


J

 - .-- '-'*


S f


Strong Alkali


9


Process adjustments at high altitudes

Using the process time for canning food at sea level may result in spoilage if you
live at altitudes of 1 ,000 feet or more. Water boils at lower temperatures as altitude
increases. Lower boiling temperatures are less effective for killing bacteria. Increas-
ing the process time or canner pressure compensates for lower boiling tempera-
tures. Therefore, when you use the guides, select the proper processing time or
canner pressure for the altitude where you live. If you do not know the altitude, con-
tact your local county Extension agent. An alternative source of information would
be the local district conservationist with the Soil Conservation Service.


Equipment and methods not recommended

Open-kettle canning and the processing of freshly filled jars in conventional ovens,
microwave ovens, and dishwashers are not recommended, because these practices
do not prevent all risks of spoilage. Steam canners are not recommended because
processing times for use with current models have not been adequately researched.
Because steam canners do not heat foods in the same manner as boiling-water
canners, their use with boiling-water process times may result in spoilage. It is not
recommended that pressure processes in excess of 15 PSI be applied when using


new pressure canning equipment. So-called canning powders are useless as pre-
servatives and do not replace the need for proper heat processing. Jars with wire
bails and glass caps make attractive antiques or storage containers for dry food in-
gredients but are not recommended for use in canning. One-piece zinc porcelain-
lined caps are also no longer recommended. Both glass and zinc caps use flat rub-
ber rings for sealing jars, but too often fail to seal properly.

Ensuring high-quality canned foods

Begin with good-quality fresh foods suitable for canning. Quality varies among vari-
eties of fruits and vegetables. Many county Extension offices can recommend vari-
eties best suited for canning. Examine food carefully for freshness and wholesome-
ness. Discard diseased and moldy food. Trim small diseased lesions or spots from
food.

Can fruits and vegetables picked from your garden or purchased from nearby pro-
ducers when the products are at their peak of quality- within 6 to 12 hours after
harvest for most vegetables. For best quality, apricots, nectarines, peaches, pears,
and plums should be ripened 1 or more days between harvest and canning. If you
must delay the canning of other fresh produce, keep it in a shady, cool place.

Fresh home-slaughtered red meats and poultry should be chilled and canned with-
out delay. Do not can meat from sickly or diseased animals. Ice fish and seafoods
after harvest, eviscerate immediately, and can them within 2 days.

Maintaining color and flavor in canned food

To maintain good natural color and flavor in stored canned food, you must:

- Remove oxygen from food tissues and jars,

- Quickly destroy the food enzymes,

- Obtain high jar vacuums and airtight jar seals.

Follow these guidelines to ensure that your canned foods retain optimum colors and
flavors during processing and storage:

- Use only high-quality foods which are at the proper maturity and are free of dis-
eases and bruises.

- Use the hot-pack method, especially with acid foods to be processed in boiling
water.

- Don't unnecessarily expose prepared foods to air. Can them as soon as possible.

- While preparing a canner load of jars, keep peeled, halved, quartered, sliced, or
diced apples, apricots, nectarines, peaches, and pears in a solution of 3 grams
(3,000 milligrams) ascorbic acid to 1 gallon of cold water. This procedure is also
useful in maintaining the natural color of mushrooms and potatoes, and for pre-
venting stem-end discoloration in cherries and grapes. You can get ascorbic acid
in several forms:


11


Pure powdered form - seasonally available among canners' supplies in super-
markets. One level teaspoon of pure powder weighs about 3 grams. Use 1 tea-
spoon per gallon of water as a treatment solution.

Vitamin C tablets - economical and available year-round in many stores. Buy
500-milligram tablets; crush and dissolve six tablets per gallon of water as a
treatment solution.

Commercially prepared mixes of ascorbic and citric acid- seasonally available
among canners' supplies in supermarkets. Sometimes citric acid powder is sold
in supermarkets, but it is less effective in controlling discoloration. If you
choose to use these products, follow the manufacturer's directions.

- Fill hot foods into jars and adjust headspace as specified in recipes.

- Tighten screw bands securely, but if you are especially strong, not as tightly as
possible.

- Process and cool jars.

- Store the jars in a relatively cool, dark place, preferably between 50° and 70° F.

- Can no more food than you will use within a year.

Advantages of hot-packing


Many fresh foods contain from 10 percent to more than 30 percent air. How long
canned food retains high quality depends on how much air is removed from food
before jars are sealed.


1


Raw-packing is the practice of filling jars tightly with freshly prepared, but unheated
food. Such foods, especially fruit, will float in the jars. The entrapped air in and
around the food may cause discoloration within 2 to 3 months of storage.
Raw-packing is more suitable for vegetables processed in a pressure canner.

Hot-packing is the practice of heating freshly prepared food to boiling, simmering it
2 to 5 minutes, and promptly filling jars loosely with the boiled food. Whether food
has been hot-packed or raw-packed, the juice, syrup, or water to be added to the
foods should also be heated to boiling before adding it to the jars. This practice
helps to remove air from food tissues, shrinks food, helps keep the food from float-
ing in the jars, increases vacuum in sealed jars, and improves shelf life. Preshrink-
ing food permits filling more food into each jar.

Hot-packing is the best way to remove air and is the preferred pack style for foods
processed in a boiling-water canner. At first, the color of hot-packed foods may ap-
pear no better than that of raw-packed foods, but within a short storage period, both
color and flavor of hot-packed foods will be superior.


Controlling headspace

The unfilled space above the food in a jar and below its lid is termed headspace.
Directions for canning specify leaving 1/4-inch for jams and jellies, 1/2-inch for fruits
and tomatoes to be processed in boiling water, and from 1- to 1-1/4-inches in low-
acid foods to be processed in a pressure canner. This space is needed for expan-
sion of food as jars are processed, and for forming vacuums in cooled jars. The ex-
tent of expansion is determined by the air content in the food and by the processing
temperature. Air expands greatly when heated to high temperatures; the higher the
temperature, the greater the expansion. Foods expand less than air when heated.


13


Jars and lids


Food may be canned in glass jars or metal containers. Metal containers can be
used only once. They require special sealing equipment and are much more costly
than jars.

Regular and wide-mouth Mason-type, threaded, home-canning jars with self-sealing
lids are the best choice. They are available in 1/2 pint, pint, 1-1/2 pint, quart, and
1/2 gallon sizes. The standard jar mouth opening is about 2-3/8 inches. Wide-mouth
jars have openings of about 3 inches, making them more easily filled and emptied.
Half-gallon jars may be used for canning very acid juices. Regular-mouth decorator
jelly jars are available in 8 and 12 ounce sizes. With careful use and handling, Ma-
son jars may be reused many times, requiring only new lids each time. When jars
and lids are used properly, jar seals and vacuums are excellent and jar breakage is
rare.


Most commercial pint- and quart-size mayonnaise or salad dressing jars may be
used with new two-piece lids for canning acid foods. However, you should expect
more seal failures and jar breakage. These jars have a narrower sealing surface
and are tempered less than Mason jars, and may be weakened by repeated contact
with metal spoons or knives used in dispensing mayonnaise or salad dressing.
Seemingly insignificant scratches in glass may cause cracking and breakage while
processing jars in a canner. Mayonnaise-type jars are not recommended for use


with foods to be processed in a pressure canner because of excessive jar breakage.
Other commercial jars with mouths that cannot be sealed with two-piece canning
lids are not recommended for use in canning any food at home.

Jar cleaning

Before every use, wash empty jars in hot water with detergent and rinse well by
hand, or wash in a dishwasher. Unrinsed detergents may cause unnatural flavors
and colors. These washing methods do not sterilize jars. Scale or hard-water films
on jars are easily removed by soaking jars several hours in a solution containing
1 cup of vinegar (5 percent acidity) per gallon of water.

Sterilization of empty jars

All jams, jellies, and pickled products processed less than 10 minutes should be
filled into sterile empty jars. To sterilize empty jars, put them right side up on the
rack in a boiling-water canner. Fill the canner and jars with hot (not boiling) water to
1 inch above the tops of the jars. Boil 10 minutes at altitudes of less than 1,000 ft.
At higher elevations, boil 1 additional minute for each additional 1,000 ft elevation.
Remove and drain hot sterilized jars one at a time. Save the hot water for process-
ing filled jars. Fill jars with food, add lids, and tighten screw bands.

Empty jars used for vegetables, meats, and fruits to be processed in a pressure
canner need not be presterilized. It is also unnecessary to presterilize jars for fruits,
tomatoes, and pickled or fermented foods that will be processed 10 minutes or
longer in a boiling-water canner.


Lid selection, preparation, and use

The common self-sealing lid consists of a flat metal lid held in place by a metal
screw band during processing. The flat lid is crimped around its bottom edge to
form a trough, which is filled with a colored gasket compound. When jars are pro-
cessed, the lid gasket softens and flows slightly to cover the jar-sealing surface, yet
allows air to escape from the jar. The gasket then forms an airtight seal as the jar
cools. Gaskets in unused lids work well for at least 5 years from date of manufac-
ture. The gasket compound in older unused lids may fail to seal on jars.

Buy only the quantity of lids you will use in a year. To ensure a good seal, carefully
follow the manufacturer's directions in preparing lids for use. Examine all metal lids
carefully. Do not use old, dented, or deformed lids, or lids with gaps or other defects
in the sealing gasket.


15


After filling jars with food, release air bubbles by inserting a flat plastic (not metal)
spatula between the food and the jar. Slowly turn the jar and move the spatula up
and down to allow air bubbles to escape. Adjust the headspace and then clean the
jar rim (sealing surface) with a dampened paper towel. Place the lid, gasket down,
onto the cleaned jar-sealing surface. Uncleaned jar-sealing surfaces may cause seal
failures.

Then fit the metal screw band over the flat lid. Follow the manufacturer's guidelines
enclosed with or on the box for tightening the jar lids properly.

Do not retighten lids after processing jars. As jars cool, the contents in the jar
contract, pulling the self-sealing lid firmly against the jar to form a high vacuum.

- If rings are too loose, liquid may escape from jars during processing, and seals
may fail.

- If rings are too tight, air cannot vent during processing, and food will discolor dur-
ing storage. Overtightening also may cause lids to buckle and jars to break, espe-
cially with raw-packed, pressure-processed food.

Screw bands are not needed on stored jars. They can be removed easily after jars
are cooled. When removed, washed, dried, and stored in a dry area, screw bands
may be used many times. If left on stored jars, they become difficult to remove, of-
ten rust, and may not work properly again.


Recommended canners

Equipment for heat-processing home-canned food is of two main types- boiling-
water canners and pressure canners. Most are designed to hold seven quart jars or
eight to nine pints. Small pressure canners hold four quart jars; some large pres-
sure canners hold 18 pint jars in two layers, but hold only seven quart jars. Pres-
sure saucepans with smaller volume capacities are not recommended for use in
canning. Small capacity pressure canners are treated in a similar manner as stan-
dard larger canners, and should be vented using the typical venting procedures.


17


Low-acid foods must be processed in a pressure canner to be free of botulism risks.
Although pressure canners may also be used for processing acid foods, boiling-
water canners are recommended for this purpose because they are faster. A pres-
sure canner would require from 55 to 100 minutes to process a load of jars; while
the total time for processing most acid foods in boiling water varies from 25 to 60
minutes. A boiling-water canner loaded with filled jars requires about 20 to 30 min-
utes of heating before its water begins to boil. A loaded pressure canner requires
about 12 to 15 minutes of heating before it begins to vent; another 10 minutes to
vent the canner; another 5 minutes to pressurize the canner; another 8 to 10 min-
utes to process the acid food; and, finally, another 20 to 60 minutes to cool the can-
ner before removing jars.


Boiling-water canners

These canners are made of aluminum or porcelain-covered steel. They have remov-
able perforated racks and fitted lids. The canner must be deep enough so that at
least 1 inch of briskly boiling water will be over the tops of jars during processing.
Some boiling-water canners do not have flat bottoms. A flat bottom must be used on
an electric range. Either a flat or ridged bottom can be used on a gas burner. To
ensure uniform processing of all jars with an electric range, the canner should be
no more than 4 inches wider in diameter than the element on which it is heated.


Using boiling-water canners

Follow these steps for successful boiling-water canning:

1 . Fill the canner halfway with water.

2. Preheat water to 140°F for raw-packed foods and to 180°F for hot-packed foods.

3. Load filled jars, fitted with lids, into the canner rack and use the handles to lower
the rack into the water; or fill the canner, one jar at a time, with a jar lifter.

4. Add more boiling water, if needed, so the water level is at least 1 inch above jar
tops.

5. Turn heat to its highest position until water boils vigorously.

6. Set a timer for the minutes required for processing the food.

7. Cover with the canner lid and lower the heat setting to maintain a gentle boil
throughout the process schedule.

8. Add more boiling water, if needed, to keep the water level above the jars.

9. When jars have been boiled for the recommended time, turn off the heat and
remove the canner lid.

1 0. Using a jar lifter, remove the jars and place them on a towel, leaving at least 1 -inch
spaces between the jars during cooling.

Pressure canners

Pressure canners for use in the home have been extensively redesigned in recent
years. Models made before the 1970's were heavy-walled kettles with clamp-on or
turn-on lids. They were fitted with a dial gauge, a vent port in the form of a petcock
or counterweight, and a safety fuse. Modern pressure canners are lightweight, thin-
walled kettles; most have turn-on lids. They have a jar rack, gasket, dial or weighted
gauge, an automatic vent/cover lock, a vent port (steam vent) to be closed with a
counterweight or weighted gauge, and a safety fuse.

Pressure does not destroy microorganisms, but high temperatures applied for an
adequate period of time do kill microorganisms. The success of destroying all mi-
croorganisms capable of growing in canned food is based on the temperature ob-
tained in pure steam, free of air, at sea level. At sea level, a canner operated at a
gauge pressure of 10.5 lbs provides an internal temperature of 240° F.


19


Two serious errors in temperatures obtained in pressure canners occur because:

1 . Internal canner temperatures are lower at higher altitudes. To correct this error,
canners must be operated at the increased pressures specified in this publication
for appropriate altitude ranges.

2. Air trapped in a canner lowers the temperature obtained at 5, 10, or 15 pounds
of pressure and results in underprocessing. The highest volume of air trapped in
a canner occurs in processing raw-packed foods in dial-gauge canners. These
canners do not vent air during processing. To be safe, all types of pressure canners
must be vented 10 minutes before they are pressurized.


To vent a canner, leave the vent port uncovered on newer models or manually open
petcocks on some older models. Heating the filled canner with its lid locked into
place boils water and generates steam that escapes through the petcock or vent
port. When steam first escapes, set a timer for 10 minutes. After venting 10 min-
utes, close the petcock or place the counterweight or weighted gauge over the vent
port to pressurize the canner.

Weighted-gauge models exhaust tiny amounts of air and steam each time their
gauge rocks or jiggles during processing. They control pressure precisely and need
neither watching during processing nor checking for accuracy. The sound of the
weight rocking or jiggling indicates that the canner is maintaining the recommended
pressure. The single disadvantage of weighted-gauge canners is that they cannot
correct precisely for higher altitudes. At altitudes above 1,000 feet, they must be
operated at canner pressures of 10 instead of 5, or 15 instead of 10, PSI.

Check dial gauges for accuracy before use each year and replace if they read high
by more than 1 pound at 5, 10, or 15 pounds of pressure. Low readings cause over-
processing and may indicate that the accuracy of the gauge is unpredictable.
Gauges may be checked at most county Cooperative Extension offices.

Handle canner lid gaskets carefully and clean them according to the manufacturer's
directions. Nicked or dried gaskets will allow steam leaks during pressurization of
canners. Keep gaskets clean between uses. Gaskets on older model canners may
require a light coat of vegetable oil once per year. Gaskets on newer model canners
are pre-lubricated and do not benefit from oiling. Check your canner's instructions if
there is doubt that the particular gasket you use has been pre-lubricated.

Lid safety fuses are thin metal inserts or rubber plugs designed to relieve excessive
pressure from the canner. Do not pick at or scratch fuses while cleaning lids. Use
only canners that have the Underwriter's Laboratory (UL) approval to ensure their
safety.

Replacement gauges and other parts for canners are often available at stores offer-
ing canning equipment or from canner manufacturers. When ordering parts, give
your canner model number and describe the parts needed.

Using pressure canners

Follow these steps for successful pressure canning:

1 . Put 2 to 3 inches of hot water in the canner. Place filled jars on the rack, using a jar
lifter. Fasten canner lid securely.

2. Leave weight off vent port or open petcock. Heat at the highest setting until steam
flows from the petcock or vent port.


21


3. Maintain high heat setting, exhaust steam 10 minutes, and then place weight on
vent port or close petcock. The canner will pressurize during the next 3 to 5
minutes.

4. Start timing the process when the pressure reading on the dial gauge indicates that
the recommended pressure has been reached, or when the weighted gauge begins
to jiggle or rock.

5. Regulate heat under the canner to maintain a steady pressure at or slightly above
the correct gauge pressure. Quick and large pressure variations during processing
may cause unnecessary liquid losses from jars. Weighted gauges on Mirro canners


should jiggle about 2 or 3 times per minute. On Presto canners, they should rock
slowly throughout the process.

6. When the timed process is completed, turn off the heat, remove the canner from
heat if possible, and let the canner depressurize. Do not force-cool the canner.
Forced cooling may result in food spoilage. Cooling the canner with cold running
water or opening the vent port before the canner is fully depressurized will cause
loss of liquid from jars and seal failures. Force-cooling may also warp the canner lid
of older model canners, causing steam leaks. Depressurization of older models
should be timed. Standard-size heavy-walled canners require about 30 minutes
when loaded with pints and 45 minutes with quarts. Newer thin-walled canners cool
more rapidly and are equipped with vent locks. These canners are depressurized
when their vent lock piston drops to a normal position.

7. After the canner is depressurized, remove the weight from the vent port or open the
petcock. Wait 2 minutes, unfasten the lid, and remove it carefully. Lift the lid away
from you so that the steam does not burn your face.

8. Remove jars with a lifter, and place on towel or cooling rack, if desired.


Selecting the correct processing time

When canning in boiling water, more processing time is needed for most
raw-packed foods and for quart jars than is needed for hot-packed foods and pint
jars.

To destroy microorganisms in acid foods processed in a boiling-water canner, you
must:

- Process jars for the correct number of minutes in boiling water.

- Cool the jars at room temperature.

The food may spoil if you fail to add process time for lower boiling-water tempera-
tures at altitudes above 1,000 feet, process for fewer minutes than specified, or cool
jars in cold water.

To destroy microorganisms in low-acid foods processed with a pressure canner, you
must:

- Process the jars using the correct time and pressure specified for your altitude.

- Allow canner to cool at room temperature until it is completely depressurized.

The food may spoil if you fail to select the proper process times for specific
altitudes, fail to exhaust canners properly, process at lower pressure than specified,
process for fewer minutes than specified, or cool the canner with water.


23


Using tables for determining proper process times

This set of guides includes processing times with altitude adjustments for each
product. Process times for 1/2-pint and pint jars are the same, as are times for 1-1/2
pint and quart jars. For some products, you have a choice of processing at 5, 10, or
15 PSI. In these cases, choose the canner pressure you wish to use and match it
with your pack style (raw or hot) and jar size to find the correct process time. The
following examples show how to select the proper process for each type of canner.
Process times are given in separate tables for sterilizing jars in boiling-water, dial-
gauge, and weighted-gauge canners.

Example A

Suppose you are canning peaches as a hot-pack in quarts at 2,500 ft above sea
level, using a boiling-water canner. First, select the process table for the type of can-
ner to be used (boiling-water canner). The tables for boiling-water canners are
coded blue in this publication. The example for peaches is given below. From that
table, select the process time given for (1) the style of pack (hot), (2) the jar size
(quarts), and (3) the altitude where you live (2,500 ft). You should have selected a
process time of 30 minutes.

Example B

Suppose you are canning peaches as a hot-pack in quarts at 2,500 ft above sea
level, using a dial-gauge pressure canner. First, select the process table for the type
of canner to be used (dial-gauge canner). The tables for dial-gauge canners are
coded lavender in this publication. The example for peaches is given below. From that
table, select the process pressure (PSI) given for (1) the style of pack (hot), (2) the
jar size (quarts), (3) the process time (10 minutes), (4) the altitude where you live
(2,500 ft). You should have selected a pressure of 7 lbs for the 10 minutes process
time.


Example C

Suppose you are canning peaches as a hot-pack in quarts at 2,500 ft above sea
level, using a weighted-gauge pressure canner. First, select the process time for the
type of canner to be used (weighted-gauge pressure canner). The tables for
weighted-gauge canners are coded pink in this publication. The example for
peaches is given below. From the table, select the process pressure (PSI) given for
(1) the style of pack (hot), (2) the jar size (quarts), (3) the process time (10 minutes),
and (4) the altitude where you live (2,500 ft). You should have selected a pressure of
10 lbs for the 10 minutes process time.


Table for Example A

Recommended process time for Peaches in a boiling-water
canner


Process Time at Altitudes of


Style

0-

1,001-

3,001-

Above

of Pack

Jar Size

1,000 ft

3,000 ft

6,000 ft

6,000 ft

Hot

Pints

20 min

25 min

30 min

35 min

Quarts

25

30

35

40

Raw

Pints

25

30

35

40

Quarts

30

35

40

45

Table for Example B

Recommended process time for Peaches in a dial-gauge pressure
canner

Canner Pressure (PSI) at Altitudes of

Style Jar Process 0- 2,001- 4,001- 6,001-

of Pack Size Time 2,000 ft 4,000 ft 6,000 ft 8,000 ft

Hot Pints 10mins 6 1b 7 1b 8 1b 9 1b

and or
Raw Quarts


Table for Example C

Recommended process time for Peaches in a weighted-gauge
pressure canner


Canner Pressure (PSI) at Altitudes of


Style
of Pack

Jar
Size

Process
Time

0-

1,000 ft

Above
1 ,000 ft

Hot

Pints

10 mins

5 lb

10 lb

and

or

Raw

Quarts

25


Cooling jars


When you remove hot jars from a canner, do not retighten their jar lids. Retightening
of hot lids may cut through the gasket and cause seal failures. Cool the jars at room
temperature for 12 to 24 hours. Jars may be cooled on racks or towels to minimize
heat damage to counters. The food level and liquid volume of raw-packed jars will
be noticeably lower after cooling. Air is exhausted during processing and food
shrinks. If a jar loses excessive liquid during processing, do not open it to add more
liquid. Check for sealed lids as described below.


V I i I ' i rr


mrr


«1 ■ T-


Use rack or towel
during cooling period.


Testing jar seals

After cooling jars for 12 to 24 hours, remove the screw bands and test seals with
one of the following options:


Option 1. Press the middle of the lid with a finger or thumb. If the lid springs up
when you release your finger, the lid is unsealed.


Option 2. Tap the lid with the bottom of a teaspoon. If it makes a dull sound, the lid
is not sealed. If food is in contact with the underside of the lid, it will also
cause a dull sound. If the jar is sealed correctly, it will make a ringing,
high-pitched sound.

Option 3. Hold the jar at eye level and look across the lid. The lid should be con-
cave (curved down slightly in the center). If center of the lid is either flat
or bulging, it may not be sealed.


Reprocessing unsealed jars

If a lid fails to seal on a jar, remove the lid and check the jar-sealing surface for tiny
nicks. If necessary, change the jar, add a new, properly prepared lid, and reprocess
within 24 hours using the same processing time. Headspace in unsealed jars may
be adjusted to 1-1/2 inches and jars could be frozen instead of reprocessed. Foods
in single unsealed jars could be stored in the refrigerator and consumed within sev-
eral days.

Storing canned foods

If lids are tightly vacuum sealed on cooled jars, remove screw bands, wash the lid
and jar to remove food residue; then rinse and dry jars. Label and date the jars and
store them in a clean, cool, dark, dry place. Do not store jars above 95° F or near
hot pipes, a range, a furnace, in an uninsulated attic, or in direct sunlight. Under
these conditions, food will lose quality in a few weeks or months and may spoil.
Dampness may corrode metal lids, break seals, and allow recontamination and
spoilage.

Accidental freezing of canned foods will not cause spoilage unless jars become un-
sealed and recontaminated. However, freezing and thawing may soften food. If jars
must be stored where they may freeze, wrap them in newspapers, place them in
heavy cartons, and cover with more newspapers and blankets.

Identifying and handling spoiled canned food

Do not taste food from a jar with an unsealed lid or food that shows signs of
spoilage. You can more easily detect some types of spoilage in jars stored without


27


screw bands. Growth of spoilage bacteria and yeast produces gas which pressur-
izes the food, swells lids, and breaks jar seals. As each stored jar is selected for
use, examine its lid for tightness and vacuum. Lids with concave centers have good
seals.

Next, while holding the jar upright at eye level, rotate the jar and examine its outside
surface for streaks of dried food originating at the top of the jar. Look at the contents
for rising air bubbles and unnatural color.

While opening the jar, smell for unnatural odors and look for spurting liquid and cot-
tonlike mold growth (white, blue, black, or green) on the top food surface and un-
derside of lid.

Spoiled low-acid foods, including tomatoes, may exhibit different kinds of spoilage
evidence or very little evidence. Therefore, all suspect containers of spoiled low-acid
foods, including tomatoes, should be treated as having produced botulinum toxin
and handled carefully in one of two ways:

- If the swollen metal cans or suspect glass jars are still sealed, place them in a
heavy garbage bag. Close and place the bag in a regular trash container or bury
it in a nearby landfill.

- If the suspect cans or glass jars are unsealed, open, or leaking, they should be
detoxified before disposal.

Detoxification process: Carefully place the suspect containers and lids on their
sides in an 8-quart volume or larger stock pot, pan, or boiling-water canner. Wash
your hands thoroughly. Carefully add water to the pot. The water should completely
cover the containers with a minimum of a 1-inch level above the containers. Avoid
splashing the water. Place a lid on the pot and heat the water to boiling. Boil 30
minutes to ensure detoxifying the food and all container components. Cool and dis-
card the containers, their lids, and food in the trash or bury in soil.

Thoroughly scrub all counters, containers, and equipment including can opener,
clothing, and hands that may have contacted the food or containers. Discard any
sponges or wash cloths that may have been used in the cleanup. Place them in a
plastic bag and discard in the trash.


Preparing pickled and fermented foods

The many varieties of pickled and fermented foods are classified by ingredients and
method of preparation.

Regular dill pickles and sauerkraut are fermented and cured for about 3 weeks. Re-
frigerator dills are fermented for about 1 week. During curing, colors and flavors
change and acidity increases. Fresh-pack or quick-process pickles are not
fermented; some are brined several hours or overnight, then drained and covered


with vinegar and seasonings. Fruit pickles usually are prepared by heating fruit in a
seasoned syrup acidified with either lemon juice or vinegar. Relishes are made from
chopped fruits and vegetables that are cooked with seasonings and vinegar.

Be sure to remove and discard a 1/16-inch slice from the blossom end of fresh cu-
cumbers. Blossoms may contain an enzyme which causes excessive softening of
pickles.

Caution: The level of acidity in a pickled product is as important to its safety
as it is to taste and texture.

- Do not alter vinegar, food, or water proportions in a recipe or use a vinegar
with unknown acidity.

- Use only recipes with tested proportions of ingredients.

- There must be a minimum, uniform level of acid throughout the mixed prod-
uct to prevent the growth of botulinum bacteria.

Ingredients

Select fresh, firm fruits or vegetables free of spoilage. Measure or weigh amounts
carefully, because the proportion of fresh food to other ingredients will affect flavor
and, in many instances, safety.

Use canning or pickling salt. Noncaking material added to other salts may make the
brine cloudy. Since flake salt varies in density, it is not recommended for making
pickled and fermented foods. White granulated and brown sugars are most often
used. Corn syrup and honey, unless called for in reliable recipes, may produce un-
desirable flavors. White distilled and cider vinegars of 5 percent acidity (50 grain)
are recommended. White vinegar is usually preferred when light color is desirable,
as is the case with fruits and cauliflower.


Pickles with reduced salt content

Recipes for pickles with reduced sodium content are provided in Guide 6.

In the making of fresh-pack pickles, cucumbers are acidified quickly with vinegar.
Use only tested recipes formulated to produce the proper acidity. While these pick-
les may be prepared safely with reduced or no salt, their quality may be noticeably
lower. Both texture and flavor may be slightly, but noticeably, different than ex-
pected. You may wish to make small quantities first to determine if you like them.

However, the salt used in making fermented sauerkraut and brined pickles not only
provides characteristic flavor but also is vital to safety and texture. In fermented
foods, salt favors the growth of desirable bacteria while inhibiting the growth of


29


others. Caution: Do not attempt to make sauerkraut or fermented pickles by
cutting back on the salt required.

Firming agents

Alum may be safely used to firm fermented pickles. However, it is unnecessary and
is not included in the recipes in this publication. Alum does not improve the firm-
ness of quick-process pickles. The calcium in lime definitely improves pickle firm-
ness. Food-grade lime may be used as a lime-water solution for soaking fresh cu-
cumbers 12 to 24 hours before pickling them. Excess lime absorbed by the
cucumbers must be removed to make safe pickles. To remove excess lime, drain
the lime-water solution, rinse, and then resoak the cucumbers in fresh water for
1 hour. Repeat the rinsing and soaking steps two more times. To further improve
pickle firmness, you may process cucumber pickles for 30 minutes in water at
180°F. This process also prevents spoilage, but the water temperature should not
fall below 180°F. Use a candy or jelly thermometer to check the water temperature.

Preventing spoilage

Pickle products are subject to spoilage from microorganisms, particularly yeasts and
molds, as well as enzymes that may affect flavor, color, and texture. Processing the
pickles in a boiling-water canner will prevent both of these problems. Standard can-
ning jars and self-sealing lids are recommended. Processing times and procedures
will vary according to food acidity and the size of food pieces.

Preparing butters, jams, jellies, and marmalades

Sweet spreads are a class of foods with many textures, flavors, and colors. They all
consist of fruits preserved mostly by means of sugar and they are thickened or jel-
lied to some extent. Fruit jelly is a semi-solid mixture of fruit juice and sugar that is
clear and firm enough to hold its shape. Other spreads are made from crushed or
ground fruit.

Jam also will hold its shape, but it is less firm than jelly. Jam is made from crushed
or chopped fruits and sugar. Jams made from a mixture of fruits are usually called
conserves, especially when they include citrus fruits, nuts, raisins, or coconut. Pre-
serves are made of small, whole fruits or uniform-size pieces of fruits in a clear,
thick, slightly jellied syrup. Marmalades are soft fruit jellies with small pieces of fruit
or citrus peel evenly suspended in a transparent jelly. Fruit butters are made from
fruit pulp cooked with sugar until thickened to a spreadable consistency.


Ingredients

For proper texture, jellied fruit products require the correct combination of fruit, pec-
tin, acid, and sugar. The fruit gives each spread its unique flavor and color. It also
supplies the water to dissolve the rest of the necessary ingredients and furnishes
some or all of the pectin and acid. Good-quality, flavorful fruits make the best jellied
products.

Pectins are substances in fruits that form a gel if they are in the right combination
with acid and sugar. All fruits contain some pectin. Apples, crab apples, gooseber-
ries, and some plums and grapes usually contain enough natural pectin to form a
gel. Other fruits, such as strawberries, cherries, and blueberries, contain little pectin
and must be combined with other fruits high in pectin or with commercial pectin
products to obtain gels. Because fully ripened fruit has less pectin, one-fourth of the
fruit used in making jellies without added pectin should be underripe.

Caution: Commercially frozen and canned juices may be low in natural pectins
and make soft textured spreads.

The proper level of acidity is critical to gel formation. If there is too little acid, the
gel will never set; if there is too much acid, the gel will lose liquid (weep). For fruits
low in acid, add lemon juice or other acid ingredients as directed. Commercial pec-
tin products contain acids which help to ensure gelling.

Sugar serves as a preserving agent, contributes flavor, and aids in gelling. Cane
and beet sugar are the usual sources of sugar for jelly or jam. Corn syrup and
honey may be used to replace part of the sugar in recipes, but too much will mask
the fruit flavor and alter the gel structure. Use tested recipes for replacing sugar
with honey and corn syrup. Do not try to reduce the amount of sugar in traditional
recipes. Too little sugar prevents gelling and may allow yeasts and molds to grow.


Jams and jellies with reduced sugar

Jellies and jams that contain modified pectin, gelatin, or gums may be made with
noncaloric sweeteners. Jams with less sugar than usual also may be made with
concentrated fruit pulp, which contains less liquid and less sugar. See Guide 7 for
recipes.

Two types of modified pectin are available for home use. One gels with one-third
less sugar. The other is a low-methoxyl pectin which requires a source of calcium
for gelling. To prevent spoilage, jars of these products must be processed longer in
a boiling-water canner. Recipes and processing times provided with each modified
pectin product must be followed carefully. The proportions of acids and fruits should
not be altered, as spoilage may result.


31


Acceptably gelled refrigerator fruit spreads also may be made with gelatin and
sugar substitutes. Such products spoil at room temperature, must be refrigerated,
and should be eaten within 1 month.


Preventing spoilage

Even though sugar helps preserve jellies and jams, molds can grow on the surface
of these products. Research now indicates that the mold which people usually
scrape off the surface of jellies may not be as harmless as it seems. Mycotoxins
have been found in some jars of jelly having surface mold growth. Mycotoxins are
known to cause cancer in animals; their effects on humans are still being
researched.

Because of possible mold contamination, paraffin or wax seals are no longer recom-
mended for any sweet spread, including jellies. To prevent growth of molds and loss
of good flavor or color, fill products hot into sterile Mason jars, leaving 1/4-inch
headspace, seal with self-sealing lids, and process 5 minutes in a boiling-water can-
ner. Correct process time at higher elevations by adding 1 additional minute per
1,000 ft above sea level. If unsterile jars are used, the filled jars should be
processed 10 minutes. Use of sterile jars is preferred, especially when fruits are low
in pectin, since the added 5-minute process time may cause weak gels. To sterilize
empty jars, see page 1 5.


Methods of making jams and jellies

The two basic methods of making jams and jellies are described in Guide 7. The
standard method, which does not require added pectin, works best with fruits natu-
rally high in pectin. The other method, which requires the use of commercial liquid
or powdered pectin, is much quicker. The gelling ability of various pectins differs. To
make uniformly gelled products, be sure to add the quantities of commercial pectins
to specific fruits as instructed on each package. Overcooking may break down pec-
tin and prevent proper gelling. When using either method, make one batch at a
time, according to the recipe. Increasing the quantities often results in soft gels. Stir
constantly while cooking to prevent burning. Recipes are developed for specific jar
sizes. If jellies are filled into larger jars, excessively soft products may result.


Canned foods for special diets

The cost of commercially canned special diet food often prompts interest in prepar-
ing these products at home. Some low-sugar and low-salt foods may be easily and
safely canned at home. However, the color, flavor, and texture of these foods may
be different than expected and be less acceptable.


Canning without sugar

In canning regular fruits without sugar, it is very important to select fully ripe but
firm fruits of the best quality. Prepare these as described for hot-packs in Guide 2,
but use water or regular unsweetened fruit juices instead of sugar syrup. Juice
made from the fruit being canned is best. Blends of unsweetened apple, pineapple,
and white grape juice are also good for filling over solid fruit pieces. Adjust head-
spaces and lids and use the processing recommendations given for regular fruits.
Add sugar substitutes, if desired, when serving.

Canning without salt (reduced sodium)

To can tomatoes, vegetables, meats, poultry, and seafood, use the procedures given
in Guides 3 through 5, but omit the salt. In these products, salt seasons the food
but is not necessary to ensure its safety. Add salt substitutes, if desired, when
serving.


Canning fruit-based baby foods

You may prepare any chunk-style or pureed fruit with or without sugar, using the
procedure for preparing each fruit as given in Guide 2. Pack in half-pint, preferably,
or pint jars and use the following processing times.


Process time for fruit-based baby foods in a boiling-water canner


Process Time at Altitudes of


Style

Jar

0-

1,001-

Above

of Pack

Size

1,000 ft

6,000 ft

6,000 ft

Hot

Pints

20 min

25

30

Caution: Do not attempt to can pureed vegetables, red meats, or poultry
meats, because proper processing times for pureed foods have not been deter-
mined for home use. Instead, can and store these foods using the standard pro-
cessing procedures; puree or blend them at serving time. Heat the blended foods to
boiling, simmer for 10 minutes, cool, and serve. Store unused portions in the refrig-
erator and use within 2 days for best quality.


How much should you can?

The amount of food to preserve for your family, either by canning or freezing,
should be based on individual choices. The following table can serve as a work-
sheet to plan how much food you should can for use within a year.


33


Suggested Preservation Plan For Canned and Frozen Foods


Servings/weeka My family needs


Kind

Serving
Size

Per person

My

family"

Cups/
weekc

Qts/

Weeks

Quarts/year

of Food

Suggest Actual

weekd

served/yr3

Total6

Canned3 Frozen3

Example: Family of 4

Fruits

1/2 cup

12 12

48

24

6

36

216

72 144

My Plan:

Fruits-
apples, berries, peaches,
plums, pears, tomatoes

1/2 cup

12

Juices-
apple, berry, grape,
tomato

1 cup

7

Vegetables-
beets, beans, carrots,
corn, peas, pumpkin,
squash

1/2 cup

16

Meat & Seafood-
red meat, poultry,
shellfish, fish

1/2 cup

14

Soups

1 cup

2

Pickles & Relishes-
ketchup, fruit pickles,
vegetable pickles,
relish, etc.

1/2 cup

Fruit Spreads-
honey, jellies, jam,
syrups, preserves, etc.

1/2 cup

Sauces-
tomato, etc.

1/2 cup

2

a Your family should make these decisions.


b Servings/week for my family = actual weekly servings/person multiplied by
number of family members who eat that food.

c Cups/week = servings/week multiplied by recommended serving size.

d Quarts/week = cups/week divided by 4.

6 Total quarts/year = quarts/week multiplied by weeks served/year.


34


Glossary of Terms


Acid foods Foods which contain enough acid to result in a pH of

4.6 or lower. Includes all fruits except figs; most toma-
toes; fermented and pickled vegetables; relishes; and
jams, jellies, and marmalades. Acid foods may be proc-
essed in boiling water.

Altitude The vertical elevation of a location above sea level.


Ascorbic acid The chemical name for vitamin C. Lemon juice con-

tains large quantities of ascorbic acid and is commonly
used to prevent browning of peeled, light-colored fruits
and vegetables.

Bacteria A large group of one-celled microorganisms widely dis-

tributed in nature. See microorganism.


Blancher A 6- to 8-quart lidded pot designed with a fitted perfo-

rated basket to hold food in boiling water, or with a fit-
ted rack to steam foods. Useful for loosening skins on
fruits to be peeled, or for heating foods to be hot
packed.


Boiling-water canner A large standard-sized lidded kettle with jar rack, de-
signed for heat-processing 7 quarts or 8 to 9 pints in
boiling water.


Botulism


An illness caused by eating toxin produced by growth
of Clostridium botulinum bacteria in moist, low-acid
food, containing less than 2 percent oxygen, and
stored between 40° and 120°F. Proper heat processing
destroys this bacterium in canned food. Freezer tem-
peratures inhibit its growth in frozen food. Low mois-
ture controls its growth in dried food. High oxygen con-
trols its growth in fresh foods.


Canning


A method of preserving food in air-tight vacuum-sealed
containers and heat processing sufficiently to enable
storing the food at normal home temperatures.


Canning salt


Also called pickling salt. It is regular table salt without
the anticaking or iodine additives.


Citric acid


A form of acid that can be added to canned foods. It
increases the acidity of low-acid foods and may im-
prove the flavor and color.


35


Cold pack Canning procedure in which jars are filled with raw

food. "Raw pack" is the preferred term for describing
this practice. "Cold pack" is often used incorrectly to
refer to foods that are open-kettle canned or jars that
are heat-processed in boiling water.

Enzymes Proteins in food which accelerate many flavor, color,

texture, and nutritional changes, especially when food
is cut, sliced, crushed, bruised, and exposed to air.
Proper blanching or hot-packing practices destroy en-
zymes and improve food quality.

Exhausting Removal of air from within and around food and from

jars and canners. Blanching exhausts air from live food
tissues. Exhausting or venting of pressure canners is
necessary to prevent a risk of botulism in low-acid
canned foods.

Fermentation Changes in food caused by intentional growth of bacte-

ria, yeast, or mold. Native bacteria ferment natural sug-
ars to lactic acid, a major flavoring and preservative in
sauerkraut and in naturally fermented dills. Alcohol,
vinegar, and some dairy products are also fermented
foods.


Headspace


The unfilled space above food or liquid in jars. Allows
for food expansion as jars are heated, and for forming
vacuums as jars cool.


Heat processing


Treatment of jars with sufficient heat to enable storing
food at normal home temperatures.


Hermetic seal


An absolutely airtight container seal which prevents
reentry of air or microorganisms into packaged foods.


Hot pack


Low-acid foods


Heating of raw food in boiling water or steam and fill-
ing it hot into jars.

Foods which contain very little acid and have a pH
above 4.6. The acidity in these foods is insufficient to
prevent the growth of the bacterium Clostridium botuli-
num. Vegetables, some tomatoes, figs, all meats, fish,
seafoods, and some dairy foods are low acid. To con-
trol all risks of botulism, jars of these foods must be
(1) heat processed in a pressure canner, or (2) acidi-
fied to a pH of 4.6 or lower before processing in boiling
water.


36


Microorganisms


Mold


Mycotoxins
Open-kettle canning


Pasteurization


PH


Pickling


Pressure canner


Independent organisms of microscopic size, including
bacteria, yeast, and mold. When alive in a suitable en-
vironment, they grow rapidly and may divide or repro-
duce every 10 to 30 minutes. Therefore, they reach
high populations very quickly. Undesirable microorgan-
isms cause disease and food spoilage. Microorgan-
isms are sometimes intentionally added to ferment
foods, make antibiotics, and for other reasons.

A fungus-type microorganism whose growth on food is
usually visible and colorful. Molds may grow on many
foods, including acid foods like jams and jellies and
canned fruits. Recommended heat processing and
sealing practices prevent their growth on these foods.

Toxins produced by the growth of some molds on
foods.

A non-recommended canning method. Food is suppos-
edly adequately heat processed in a covered kettle,
and then filled hot and sealed in sterile jars. Foods
canned this way have low vacuums or too much air,
which permits rapid loss of quality in foods. Moreover,
these foods often spoil because they become recontam-
inated while the jars are being filled.

Heating of a specific food enough to destroy the most
heat-resistant pathogenic or disease-causing microor-
ganism known to be associated with that food.

A measure of acidity or alkalinity. Values range from 0
to 14. A food is neutral when its pH is 7.0: lower val-
ues are increasingly more acid; higher values are in-
creasingly more alkaline.

The practice of adding enough vinegar or lemon juice
to a low-acid food to lower its pH to 4.6 or lower. Prop-
erly pickled foods may be safely heat processed in
boiling water.

A specifically designed metal kettle with a lockable lid
used for heat processing low-acid food. These canners
have jar racks, one or more safety devices, systems for
exhausting air, and a way to measure or control
pressure.


37


Canners with 20- to 21 -quart capacity are common. The
minimum volume of canner that can be used is 16-quart
capacity, which will contain 7 quart jars. Use of pres-
sure saucepans with less than 1 6-quart capacities is
not recommended.


Raw pack The practice of filling jars with raw, unheated food. Ac-

ceptable for canning low-acid foods, but allows more
rapid quality losses in acid foods heat processed in
boiling water.

Spice bag A closeable fabric bag used to extract spice flavors in

a pickling solution.

Style of pack Form of canned food, such as whole, sliced, piece,

juice, or sauce. The term may also be used to reveal
whether food is filled raw or hot into jars.

Vacuum The state of negative pressure. Reflects how

thoroughly air is removed from within a jar of
processed food- the higher the vacuum, the less air
left in the jar.


Yeasts


A group of microorganisms which reproduce by bud-
ding. They are used in fermenting some foods and in
leavening breads.


Index of Foods


Guide Page


Apples


apple-pear jam

7

8

butter

2

6

juice

2

6

pie filling

2

18

sauce

2

7

spread with gelatin,

refrigerated

7

12

sliced

2

7

spiced crab

2

9

spiced rings

2

8

Apricots

halvpd or ^licpri

2

9

puree

2

13

Asparagus

spears or pieces

4

5

Beans

hakpd

4

k

dry, with tomato or

molasses sauce

4

6

italian green, pieces

4

8

lima

4

7

nirklpd dillpd

6

10

shelled and dried

4

5

^nan nrppn and

wax, pieces

4

8

three-bean salad

6

10

Bear

ground or chopped

5

6

strips, cubes, or

chunks

5

6

Beef

oround or rhooopd

5

6

strios cubps or

chunks

5

6

Beets

pickled

6

1 1

wholp cubpd or

slicGd

4

9

Berries

U 1 CL\s r\UC 1 1 IC^O, VV 1 i\JlSs

o

m
i \j

blueberries

pie filling

2

19

spice jam

7

9

syrup

2

11

whole

2

10

currants, whole

2

10

dewberries, whole

2

10

elderberries, whole

2

10

gooseberries

2

10

huckleberries,

whole

2

10

loganberries, whole

2

10

mulberries, whole

2

10

puree

2

13

raspberries

syrup

2

11

whole

2

10

Guide Page

strawberries


-rhubarb jelly

7

9

syrup

2

11

Broth, Meat

5

7

Brussel Sprouts

nicklpd

6

12

Carrots

sliced or diced

4

10

Cauliflower

pickled

6

12

Cherries

pie filling

2

20

syrup

2

11

whole

2

11

Chicken

5

5

Chile Con Came

5

8

Clams

whole or minced

5

9

Corn

cream style

4

11

nirklpd rplish

6

13

whole kernel

4

12

Crab Meat

King or Dungeness

5

9

Figs

2

12

Fish

blue, mackerel,

salmon,

steelhead, trout,

and other fatty

fish, except tuna

5

10

smoked

5

11

tuna

5

12

Fruit Cocktail

ithypH

2

15

Fruit Purees

2

13

Grapefruit Sections

2

13

Grapes

juice

2

14

plum jelly

7

10

puree

2

13

spread with gelatin,

refrigerated

7

12

syrup

2

11

whole

2

14

Greens

4

20

Horseradish Sauce

pickled

6

13

Guide Page

Jam


blueberry-spice

7

9

low-^unar npach-

ninpannlp ^nrparl

7

1 1

pear-apple

7

8

standard or lona-

boil

7

6

with added pectin

7

7

without added

npctin

7

6

Jelly

apple spread with

gelatin,

refrigerated

7

12

grape-plum

7

10

oranp SDread with

gelatin,

refrigerated

7

12

standard or lona-

boil

7

5

strawberry-rhubarb

7

9

with added pectin

7

7

without addpd

opctin

|J v v LI 1 1

7

5

Lamb

oround or choDDed

5

6

strips, cubes or

chunks

5

6

Meat Stock (broth)

5

7

Mincemeat

festive pie filling

2

20

Mushrooms

marinated

6

14

wholp or ^licpd

4

13

Nectarines

halved or sliced

2

16

puree

2

13

Okra

pickled dill

6

14

wholp or ^lirpd

4

14

with tomatoes

3

12

Onion-Pepper Relish

6

18

Orange Sections

2

13

Oysters

5

11

Peaches

halved or sliced

2

16

low-sugar peach-

pineapple spread

7

11

puree

2

13

Pears

-apple jam

7

8

halved

2

17

puree

2

13

39


Guide Page

Peas


green or english,


shelled

4

15

shelled or dried

4

5

PeDDers

hot or sweet

4

16

marinated

6

15

pepper-onion relish

6

18

piccalilli

6

18

pickled bell

6

16

pickled hot

6

17

Pickled Vegetables

beans, dilled

6

10

beets

6

11

brussel sprouts

6

12

cauliflower

6

12

green tomatoes,

sweet

6

26

horseradish sauce

6

13

mixed vegetables

6

27

mushrooms, whole,

marinated

6

14

okra, dilled

6

14

peppers, hot

6

17

peppers, marinated

6

15

squash, bread-and-

butter

6

20

three-bean salad

6

10

zucchini, bread-

and-butter

6

28

Pickles

bread-and-butter

6

19

dill

fermented

6

7

fresh-packed,

quick

6

20

reduced-sodium

6

20

refriqerated

6

8

sweet

1 4-day

6

23

gherkin

6

21

quick

6

24

reduced-sodium

6

25

Pie Fillings

apple

2

18

blueberry

2

19

cherry

2

20

mincemeat, festive

2

20

tomato, green

2

21

peach

2

22

Pineapple

low-calorie peach

spread

7

11

pieces

2

23

puree

2

13

-zucchini

2

25

Plums

halved or whole

2

23

-grape jelly

7

10

puree

2

13

Guide Page

Pork


around or choonpd

5

6

strips, cubes, or

chunks

5

6

Potatoes

sweet, pieces or

whole

4

17

white, cubed or

whole

4

18

Pumpkin

cubed

4

18

Rabbit

5

5

Relish

corn

6

13

horseradish

6

13

pepper-onion

6

18

piccalilli

6

18

pickle

6

22

tomato, green

6

26

Rhubarb

stewed

2

24

-strawberry jelly

7

9

Sauerkraut

6

8

Smoked Fish

5

11

Soups

dried bean or pea

4

19

meat

4

19

poultry

4

19

seafood

4

19

vegetable

4

19

Spinach and

Other Greens

4

20

Squash

pumpkin

4

18

winter

4

21

Stock Meat

5

7

Succotash

4

22

Sweet Potatoes

pieces or whole

4

17

Syrup

blueberry

2

cherry

2

grape

2

raspberry

2

strawberry

2

Tomatoes

chile salsa

3

18

crushed

3

7

green tomato pie

filling

2

21

Guide Page


nrppn tomato rplish

6

26

juice

3

5

ketchup

3

16

ketchup, blender

3

17

kptchuo countrv

western

3

17

oirralilli

UlwUl 1 1 1 1

U

18

pickled, sweet

green

6

26

sauce, Mexican

3

15

sauce, standard

3

8

SDaahetti

with meat

3

14

without meat

3

13

vegetable juice

blend

3

6

whole or halved

packed in juice

3

10

packed in water

3

9

packed raw

without

Hill 1 V. ' VJ l

added liquid

3

11

with okra or

zucchini

3

12

Tuna

5

12

Veal

oround or ohonDPd

y i vUl lU vi I i kj yj \^ \J

5

6

<?trioe; cubes or

chunks

5

6

Vegetables, Mixed

regular

4

13

quick pickled

6

27

Venison

ground or chopped

5

6

strips, cubes, or

chunks

5

6

Winter Squash

cubed

4

21

Zucchini

bread-and-butter

pickles

6

28

-pineapple

2

25

40


Nflllinw MU il?i?,PICULTURAL LIBRARY


1022564354
